---
aliases: []
tags: []
author: "Harmony Bench"
year: "2020"
title: "Perpetual Motion: Dance, Digital Cultures, and the Common"
type: "literature"
current-status: "in-process"
updated: "20210824"
---


# Bench - Perpetual Motion

> [Perpetual Motion] proceeds from the position that digital technologies, and especially internet technologies, have thoroughly saturated the practices, creation, distribution, and viewers’ experiences of dance. Why should this sea change in dance creation and reception matter? It is not only that digital media have radically reformatted dance for an era of information globalization, accelerating and expanding the ways that bodily motion proliferates as it is uploaded, downloaded, and shared as data—though these are important considerations. It is that, in thus remediating and reformatting dance, digital media throw open, magnify, and broadly disseminate dancing’s already powerful physical articulations of how we act in common.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.3]


> My primary framework for understanding how dance circulates through digital cultures is the common or commons. The participatory commons appeals as an alternative to the extractive neoliberal financial logics that govern much of contemporary life in the United States and beyond, and scholars across academic disciplines have turned to the commons to explore these alternative social and economic arrangements.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.4]

- Curious re common spaces, but also extractive aspects of social media


> Although there are many examples of communities sharing and sustaining common-pool resources, as economist Elinor Ostrom and others have amply demonstrated,5 scholars typically invoke the commons in Europe that were, for the most part, eradicated during eighteenth-century enclosure movements that forcibly removed peasants from common lands and privatized natural resources. In such discussions, scholars tend to emphasize enclosure as a social, political, and economic tragedy while leaving to the side the European feudal system of which these commons were a part, thus enabling a contemporary discourse in which the commons signal open access, anticapitalism, and radical democracy. Although this romanticized version of the commons may be useful for imaging contemporary social projects, historically, the commons were not the progressive social model they have been made out to be.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.4]


> Produced rather than discovered, the common is neither public nor private, and it provides an alternate avenue for theorizing social and cultural production. Hardt and Negri’s aim in exploring the common is to uncover market economies’ ongoing dependence on—and their corruption of—the common for the purposes of continued financial growth. The common provides the [p.5] resources and ingenuity upon which neoliberal capital depends. However, in registering that "contemporary forms of capitalist production and accumulation, paradoxically make possible and even require expansions of the common,"10 Hardt and Negri do not attend to the negative consequences or imbalances of that expansion. They analyze capitalist expropriations of the common but do not fully consider the politics of dispossession by which materials are appropriated into the common. In other words, they do not acknowledge the parallel structures of neocolonial and neoliberal logics that unevenly distribute the benefits of access.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.6] 
> If the common expands infinitely within globalization,11 what gets appropriated into the common that was previously privately held, owned, or shared within an exclusive community? Kimberly Christen summarizes these tensions in her work on the rights of indigenous peoples to curate the flow of cultural heritage information through digital media. In internet culture, she remarks, "the commons signifies openness, the exclusion of intermediaries, and remix culture that is creative, innovative, and politically disobedient."12 However, she contends, "ongoing legacies of colonialism cannot be jettisoned for the wish of a global commons."13 Dance scholar and political theorist Randy Martin similarly advises wariness of the common or commons in the current era of financialization: "What it means to own something, just like what it means to be possessed of oneself, undergoes significant modulation under financialization . . . [which] spreads ownership around in vexing ways."14 He goes on, "Now that ownership is so thoroughly spread around, far more can partake of the entitlements of others."15 For Martin, parceled out and indiscernible ownership does not portend greater social responsibility or ideals of the common good. On the contrary, under such circumstances, what is common is generated through dispossession, which refuses to share in the wealth generated by and predicated on the very availability of the common.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.6]^3fb97b

- This is important. Common space. Common dancing. For others. extractive. (Zuboff)

> In approaching dance as common, it is necessary to continuously examine how the common repackages ideologies of freedom and universal access in the project of proliferating and circulating movement, while simultaneously acknowledging how dancing can craft a sense of mutual belonging through the sharing of movements and gestures.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.8]

> Much like social media today, eighteenth-century popular performance functioned as an avenue for political expression and representation in which audiences vigorously participated. Dillon foregrounds corporeal practices and dramatic performances rather than the written word, which, in her study, expands a consideration of the eighteenth-century public sphere in the Atlantic world beyond the lettered peoples of a Habermasian public sphere to include the participation of indigenous, colonized, and enslaved populations whose expressivity was channeled into nonliterary forms. In her view, a performative commons enables an account of commoning practices, or the means available to "articulat[e] relations of mutual belonging in a collective whole."23 For Dillon, the commons is spatial, interpersonal, and, above all, a relation.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.8]


> I similarly find that digital media, especially the space of the internet, offer contemporary performative commons in which individuals both perform and contest their belonging through practices such as dance.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.8]

- But who is belonging to what? Who owns them? They belong to Silicon Valley. That is, it's as if Bench hasn't zoomed out far enough (as it would undermine her thesis?)

> How, why, and for whom are assertions of dance as common meaningful in digital contexts?[@bench-2020-perpetual p.9]

> I decided, in the spirit of the ascendance of social media during this time frame, to foreground how amateurs, fans, spectators, and bystanders are invited to participate in and contribute to dance onscreen, how digital cultures reimagine who gets to be a dance performer or choreographer, and how digital technologies mediate bodily proximity among dance practitioners. I placed some additional explicit limits on what I address in this book, largely due to attention such work receives from other scholars. I do not address intermedia works made for the concert stage, nor do I include Hollywood dance films even though they circulate online as part of a vast archive of popular culture.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.10]

> I contend that the scale of danced participation in digital cultures demonstrates that, despite being identified as the art of the body par excellence, dance proliferates across bodies in large part because of its perpetual movement through digital media.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.11]

- Not so clear yet what HB means by digital media (and its relation to social media)

> Dance makes visible how cultural processes recruit participants at the level of their embodiment, offering an opportunity to consider the various political, cultural, and technological projects into which we are enlisted without our full awareness or knowledge. Dance scholars thus have an opportunity—perhaps even a mandate—to contribute their deep investments in bodies as sites of knowledge and practice to such analyses of digital cultures as I pursue in Perpetual Motion.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.11]


> I begin Perpetual Motion before Web 2.0 in part for reasons of history: social media offer the current culturally dominant logics of creation and circulation, but how dance operates in social media appears in greater relief when considered in context with dance experimentations on the early web. By and large, dance experiments from the late 1990s and early 2000s have not been written about, and many of them are accessible only in deteriorated form. Nevertheless, they paved the way for later incarnations of dance in digital cultures and established expectations about the ways dance can be presented in nonproscenium digital environments. These expectations include the promise of freedom and democratization through interactivity and the use of repetition in composition.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.15]


> Hyperdances cannot deliver on their promise of freedom of choice and collaborative authorship because interactive systems are designed to facilitate selection rather than creation. While outwardly, hyperdances seem to foster inclusivity and making-common by bringing interactors into the work, they also constrain users’ agency and trap screen dancers within replay loops. This shared lack of agency masquerading as freedom becomes a narrative focus for Somnambules and other works that dramatize onscreen performers’ digital capture. I argue that it is not until the choreographic structures of interactive media give way to participation that the repetition built into dance-media experiences can transform into something new through what Jean-Luc Nancy calls unworking.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.15]

- But participation hasn’t led to agency has it? (Just the perception of it)

> An unworked work is infinished, but it is not the same as an open work, which Umberto Eco describes as a work that offers performers a variety of interpretive avenues within "a range of rigidly preestablished" possibilities.96 Examples of open works include both the hyperdances we have discussed in this chapter and the crowdsourced, participatory choreographies we will consider in chapter 3.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.53]

- Where do these women stand here? Where is the line between infinished and open? I could argue that their work is merely open. Surely they aren’t unworking something?

> With the term public, I am speaking more specifically of public spaces, which is to say, built environments and physical locations, even though my analysis focuses on the circulation of videos featuring these spaces through media channels.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.64]

- I did experience these two in public. See quote below as well.

> Dance in public does not follow the distinctions between public and private based on property ownership: for my purposes, dance in public excludes the private sphere as domestic site (even though dancers routinely record their private dances for public circulation online), but it does not exclude private property, nor private or semiprivate experiences of public places. Dancing in public is as much about exposure to onsite spectators (who may not actually be the target audience) as it is about dancing in venues that are available and accessible to the general public.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.64]^266756

> In brief, dance in public describes dances that take place outside of areas that have been specially designated or set aside for dancing. They may occur with or without permission. They may lend themselves to any social, commercial, or political agenda or may exist primarily as entertainment. Dance in public does not require social media, but, like planking, horsemanning, Tebowing, Hadoukening,31 and other viral photography memes, as a genre of public performance, dance in public is greatly facilitated by the channels of distribution that social media offer, and its meaning is accentuated by other similar circulations. The online life of dance in public is thus a central consideration, and it is therefore difficult if not impossible to separate dance in public from social media in an era when the latter are determining forces of contemporary social life and engagement. Dance in public avails itself of the digital commons, which both circulates and provides audiences for these videos. As a result, many of the public performances seem to target an audience of internet users more so than copresent spectators.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.65]

- What is this ‘digital commons’. Really? Can it be described as such?

> Trimbur interacts with others a little more than her freestyling followers, but even she is not performing "for" a co-present audience. All of the dancers in these videos face the camera, performing for an audience of asynchronous internet spectators. Here documentation does not serve the function of historical preservation, that is, recording a fleeting performance in a more durable medium. Rather, documentation of dance in public sits somewhere between what Roland Barthes calls the "that-has-been" (ça a été) of the photographed subject ("pics or it didn’t happen," as the familiar catch-phrase goes) and what Philip Auslander describes as "performed photography," or photographs that do not merely document a performance event but are the medium of its enactment.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.66]

> Couched in a narrative of which passersby on the street are unaware, the affective impact of Marsen’s dancing is far more profound for asynchronous viewers than for those who briefly encountered her antics in person. Onsite, both Trimbur and Marsen maximize their potential for spatial disruption, but online, that disruption transforms their respective cityscapes into what Krupnick calls a "positive spectacle."[@bench-2020-perpetual p.67]

> In addition, whether audience delight or empathy serves as a primary aim, dance in public facilitates the renewal of social bonds41— made tenuous due to xenophobic suspicion, mass shootings, police violence, electoral politics, and economic warfare—thus helping to recuperate public space as a shared or common site of sociality.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.68]

- These two women weren’t doing any of this. No audience delight. Not really a common site of sociality either.

> Dance in public meets social movements on the same ground, with recourse to similar tactics of occupation that forcefully assert the public dimension of both publicly and privately owned spaces, folding them back into the common.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.68]

- But what does HB mean here? It’s the division of public/private that isn’t nuanced enough for me here. Also, what common?

> They reappropriate spaces for public action and reorient expectations for public behavior.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.68]

- Lockdown prevented even this possibility. Ought I go into lockdown conditions a little more — that they afforded particular kinds of shared/unshared spaces?



> In an era when public space is itself fraught and contested, dance in public proves to be a crucial mechanism for critiquing, reclaiming, and transforming public space into a space of the common.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.68]

- This is contestable, and hardly believable BECAUSE it is written by a dance person. Self-serving. Is this just simply a form of advocacy. Academic advocacy?

> As a result, though it may be true that acts of dancing remain minimal as far as everyday experiences go, more people have an exponentially greater exposure to dance than when Martin was writing in the late 1990s.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.72]

- Not if expressed as percentage of all content online. Doesn’t make sense.

- 2wd is at Other end of spectrum from what HB is describing. Two people in process. Playing. It’s certainly not an Arendtian ‘space of appearance’, except perhaps here, in these pages. And they are certainly not dancing in a non-place (Augé). Also that common is not surveilled (which is amazing in the UK given hyper-presence of cameras). (See bottom of p.79 in Bench). Important that I don’t want to impose on these two people. To police their actions. Or judge them?

> Although American individualism encourages people to stand out from the crowd, in fact, visibility resulting from physical comportment, deportment, style, or general deviation from the norm invites reprimand. Thus panoptic surveillance produces, as Michel Foucault argues, "a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the automatic functioning of power."76 Visibility is therefore not synonymous with appearance as Arendt conceptualizes it. Foucault continues, "He who is subjected to a field of visibility, and who knows it, assumes responsibility for the constraints of power; he makes them play spontaneously upon himself; he inscribes himself in the power relation in which he simultaneously plays both roles; he becomes the principle of his own subjection."77 Visibility interpellates individuals into a hierarchical social matrix wherein some actors mobilize power as a repressive force over others, with the ultimate goal that self-policing will replace policing by the state or other apparatus. "Visibility is a trap."78 Appearance, in contrast, is predicated on the co-presence of and recognition by equals who empower themselves by working together in a public realm. Indeed, for Arendt, power exists precisely in this plurality, in "this potentiality in being together,"79 and is distinct from both strength and force.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.80]

- Are these two women empowered? It seems the very opposite of this.

> Crucially, for Arendt, power is a positive energy deployed by the people collectively, whereas for Foucault, power is a system of regulation and regularization that is neither wholly positive nor negative. These divergent conceptions of power undergird their theorizations of visibility as appearance or surveillance. We might say that appearance differentiates among equals without undermining their equality (it is a premise, not a promise, as Rancière argues),80 whereas surveillance renders equality an undifferentiated mass from which difference can be isolated, extracted, and either fostered or flat-lined.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.80]

- What equality is being discussed here?

> Appearance, predicated on equality, is not given; it must be activated, insisted upon, asserted, performed. It must erupt and break through the crystalizing scan of surveillance.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.81]

- These two women have appeared to me. In this sense of Arendt’s space of appearance.

> Echoing Deleuze and Guattari, Rancière argues that artists transform sensation: "What the artist does is to weave together a new sensory fabric by wresting percepts and affects from the perceptions and affections that make up the fabric of ordinary experience. Weaving this new fabric means creating a form of common expression or a form of expression of the community."[@bench-2020-perpetual p.85]

> For Rancière, artistic productions that seek social and political transformation as their own proper end point misunderstand the nature of both politics and art and can only be a disappointment insofar as they will never be able to deliver on their promises. Political art may aspire to raise consciousness about this or that social ill, but there is no guarantee that [p.85] viewers will be prompted to change their behavior or revolt as a result of an elevated or renewed critical consciousness.[@bench-2020-perpetual pp.85-86]

> Up to this point, I have focused primarily on dances in public that do not seem to have a political agenda attached to their claims to public space to show that the absence of an overt agenda does not diminish the ability of these performances to articulate a common space in public space, a space of appearance in a non-place of surveillance.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.86]

> Dance in public focuses its energies on the dissensual confrontation between public space as a non-place of surveillance and as a common space of appearance in which to manifest a full range of freedoms of movement and expression.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.88]

- Critical — these two women are together in public because that was the only space for them. I’m not sure they are either in a non-place or in a common space of appearance.

> Nancy, like Noland, does not overemphasize language and naming as what makes sense, meaning, and world. Instead, he points to ethos, praxis, and habitus.68 World is not, however, poiesis—a mode of fabrication attributed to the artist who stands outside of a world of her own making. Stated differently, world manifests in moral character, practical action, and bodily disposition, through which world is enacted—not made. Though Nancy speaks of creating the world, he does not speak of world-making, as making suggests finality and completion. Instead, the world is incomplete, inoperative (désœuvré). Enactments of world through ethos, praxis, and habitus cite previous scripts to remain meaningful, but they continuously bring a world into being through new, incomplete, ongoing action. Again, according to Nancy, the world no longer derives its meaning from a god-creator who made it. Instead, the meaning of the world arises from its inhabitants. We ourselves imagine, create, and sustain the world. A world, that is to say, being-with or being-in-common, is a physical practice and disposition, [p.119] a performative enactment that presences the world with each enactment of it. We might suggest, employing Virno’s language, that the world is virtuosic. It produces nothing other than itself, for no other purpose than itself.69 The world is a creation "with neither principle nor end nor material other than itself," says Nancy.70 Performing-world produces world as being-together, as coexistence. Through this performance of the with or together, the world creates a sense of itself as that which, "in the course of being thought, itself become indiscernible from its praxis."71[@bench-2020-perpetual pp.119-120]

> Here I focus on the intensification of neoliberal economic logics in the early twenty-first century that encourages, on one hand, an ideology of free giving that obscures social and deferred costs and, on the other hand, encourages the monetization of what appears to be given or made freely available. Contemporary entrepreneurial activities mine collective archives and compel computer users to donate their personal data and the like in exchange for access to online services. We need only look at the success of Facebook or Google to understand "free" as a business model.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.140]


> In his parsing of sharing and pseudo-sharing behaviors on social networking sites (SNSs), business and marketing scholar Russell Belk observes that [p.141] "the ubiquitous ‘share’ button and invitations to share from the SNS are best regarded as nicely packaged invitations to provide content to the site, encourage more participants, and in so-doing provide information that can be sold to advertisers, marketers, and research firms."5 Gift economies directly participate in this logic of financialization, which, dance and political theorist Randy Martin has argued, "brings people together only to seem to take away what they thought they possessed."6[@bench-2020-perpetual pp.140-141]

> Dance, as Anthea Kraut acknowledges, may simultaneously participate in gift and market economies.7 These economies are not antithetical to each other, but each suggests proximity or distance among participants in a relationship of exchange, or the worlds in which they participate. The convergence of gift and market economies complicates perceptions of inclusivity and exclusivity, rights of access versus those of reuse or reproduction, and expanding gestural repertories in a corporeal common as dances travel from screen to screen and body to body.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.141]

- The problem is about what is hidden. The externalities. It doesn’t really function in either kind of market. Gift and market depend on transparency. visibility.

> I offer examples from approximately 2009 to 2016 to propose that dance circulates in digital cultures as a gift but that the content of this gift belongs to a common.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.141]

> My aim in this chapter is neither to advocate nor to dismiss dance as a common-pool resource but to grapple with how dance artists, practitioners, and fans leverage different corporeal commons and how the structuring concepts of credit and debt that define an era of financialization may be recuperated for understanding dance as a gift of the common.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.142]

> Tensions arise, it seems, when a dance or dance practice flows from one sense of belonging to another. Importantly, it is not commodification as such that produces this tension but what commodification enables: the circulation of gestural belongings outside the communities of practice that manifest social belonging through those very gestures, and the financial profits that accrue to those who facilitate monetized circulation as compared to community participation.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.148]

> Despite the continuing drive to privatize resources and wealth, Hardt and Negri recognize that "contemporary forms of capitalist production and accumulation, paradoxically make possible and even require expansions of the common."66 For this reason, Randy Martin views contemporary revaluations of the common(s) with suspicion. Referencing the enclosure movement that forcibly removed eighteenth-century peasants from common lands, Martin argues that "now dispossession breeds commons without anyone needing to be moved anywhere."67 [@bench-2020-perpetual p.159]

^2630fc

> Indeed, the concept of the natural common requires adherence to practices of exclusion so as to avoid the very tragedy of the commons that Garrett Hardin famously describes in his economic fable.68 [@bench-2020-perpetual p.159]

> Gift economies retain the connection between giver and gift (or contributor and contribution), mediated by the recipient. Market economies, as Marx observed, alienate producers from (the products of ) their labor, and compensation, in theory, terminates the relationship with payment for services rendered—whether in the context of a factory, a dance studio, or a video game.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.179]

> Maurizio Lazzarato follows Nietzsche in arguing that it is debt that lies at the foundation of social relations. The principle of exchange, Lazzarato argues, presupposes parties that are on equal footing, but acknowledging the force of debt in structuring social relations also acknowledges that there is an imbalance of power in every relation, and this influences the flow of capital. Imbalance "does not mean that exchange does not exist, but rather that it functions according to a logic not of equality but of disequilibrium and difference."128[@bench-2020-perpetual p.180]

> "Within relations of presumed inequality, no presumption of reciprocity exists," Graeber remarks,132 fostering a scenario in which, as Dienst contends, "capital always tries to take credit for everything people can do in common."133 [@bench-2020-perpetual p.181]

> In positing dance as gift of the common, I wish to undo the privileged Derridean account in which gifts circulate without thought of return and suggest instead that a Maussian interpretation of the structure of the gift better grasps how dance’s circulation through digital media is underwritten by dancers’ corporeal generosity and gestural indebtedness. As common, dances circulate freely through digital media, but as gifts, they circulate with social obligations attached. Attending to these social obligations offers an opportunity to maintain an ethical orientation toward sharing in the movement and gestures of others.[@bench-2020-perpetual p.187]

