---
aliases: []
tags: [losing-self]
type: "evergreen"
---

# body awareness and emotion

_previous note:_ [[emotion, affect and internal bodily awareness]]

This is a paragraph by Jocelyn Sze et al that summarises research on body awareness and emotion. Included here in full as it's so tight.

> The notion that bodily sensations contribute importantly to our subjective emotional experience appears in the literature in a number of forms. James (1884) famously asserted that emotions occur when the perception ofan exciting fact causes a collection of bodily changes and that “our feeling of the same changes as they occur is the emotion” (p. 189). Lakoff (1987) noted the prominence of bodily metaphors when we describe the experience of certain emotions (e.g., heat and pressure metaphors when describing anger). Consistent with these views, we (Levenson, 1999) postulated that the “subjective experience of a given emotion derives largely from the sensations that are generated by the activation of the associated response package” (p. 496). Similarly, theories of embodied cognition suggest that there is a reciprocal relationship between bodily activity and the way emotional information is processed (for a review, see Niedenthal, 2007). These notions are also found in contemporary neuroscience, with Damasio (2000) postulating that one of the main roles of emotion is to bring the autonomic processes of our bodies into awareness, providing “somatic markers” that guide our choices and actions. [@sze-2010-coherence p.804]

- have downloaded Niedenthal
- The Damasio is _Descarte's Error_ from 2000.
- [[the overlap between bodily and emotional feelings]]
- see also  (Craig, 2009; Critchley, Wiens, Rotshtein, Ohman, & Dolan, 2004; Damasio, 2003) -- all cited in [[Jocelyn A. Sze, Anett Gyurak, Joyce W. Yuan, and Robert W. Levenson - Coherence Between Emotional Experience and Physiology Does Body Awareness Training Have an Impact]] -- covering link between body awareness and emotion. 

- see also:

> Although many contemporary emotion theories espouse both of these concepts, little is known about how response coherence and awareness of bodily sensations interact in the experience of emotion. The present study poses a question bridging these two domains, asking whether individuals who have specialized training in body awareness will have greater coherence between subjective and physiological aspects of emotion. We reason that if sensations emanating from bodily responses are primary constituents of subjective emotional experience, then subjective emotional experience should more closely track and be coherent with physiological responding for those who are more aware of their bodily responses. [@sze-2010-coherence p.803]
- useful for [[embodied intelligence project]] and the sense that emotional/affective experience of Transparencies is important.

---

_original source/found:_ 

_reference:_ 



