---
tags: [blog-post]
---

# early questions for practice-research

_previous note:_ [[thomson - practice as research]]

---

A list of questions "formulated in collaboration with the practice-as-research communities"[Piccini, in @thomson_practice_2003 p.161] on the [PARIP mailing list](https://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/cgi-bin/webadmin?A0=PARIP) in 2002. 

1. How does PaR problematize notions of the Higher Education institution?
2. How does PaR problematize notions of research?
3. How does PaR problematize notions of the professional artist and academic researcher?
4. What might be the various epistemologies of and knowledges generated by PaR?
5. How has the relationship between critical writing and other forms of representation been conceptualized in the dissemination of PaR in the field of live performance? Relationships among documentation -- evidence -- PaR: what is the research status of performance documentation, or performance out of context?
6. What makes an instance of practice ‘count’ as research? Does PaR involve different methods as a result of its framing as research (as distinct from ‘pure’ practice)?
7. What is the status in the academies of work done in the performance ‘industries’?
8. How are the various roles of technologies in PaR conceptualized?
9. How important are the screening contexts to PaR in film and television?
10. What kinds of resourcing/plant are needed for PaR?
11. What might an ethics of PaR look like - in respect of its collaborative
nature in the light of individual recognition/validation?
12. How are the multiple locations of PaR knowledges conceptualized
and assessed?
13. How important are issues of documentation to film and television
practices?
14. How should PaR be evaluated, and by whom?
15. Must PaR include some form of disseminable reflection? or is the
practice in performance sufficient to stand as research output?

-- Angela Piccini [in @thomson_practice_2003 p.161]



---

_thoughts & links:_

- It's kind of crazy just how little has changed in 18 years (other than we seem to use the word problematize a little less often now). Some questions though have just gone away even though they never really got addressed (at least in the UK). I'm thinking here of 10, 11 and 14 in particular. The whole conversation -- edited by Thomson -- is well worth reading. 
- #practice-research 
- #par_blog 
- [[a case for writing in practice-research]]
- [[artefacts and writing in practice-research]]
- [[practice-research and transient knowledge]]
- [[specialist and generalist audience in practice-research]]
- [[dissemination, accumulation and originality]]


---

_source:_ borgdorff-2006-debate.pdf

_citekey & zotero link:_ [thomson_practice_2003](zotero://select/items/1_2L3RKVVB)

_reference:_ Thomson, P., 2003. 'Practice as Research'. _Studies in Theatre and Performance 22_, 159–180.


