---
aliases: []
tags: []
type: "evergreen"
---

# five main positions on practice research

_previous note:_ [[we access time through objects or artifacts]]

> At art universities themselves, it is possible to identify ... five main positions on artistic research. I would term and describe them as follows:

> - _Emphatic_—Artistic work is per se research: art = research.
> - _Critical_—Art should not have anything to do with research: artists should keep their hands off research, since the paradigms of the sciences—meaning the paradigms of the natural sciences—apply there. Because the dominance of the latter cannot be overcome, art as research would have to be placed under the primacy of “the” natural sciences, which would not be productive for it.10
> - _Tactical_—Art has nothing to do with research. But when it is a matter of money for research, then all art is research.
> - _Strategic_—Artistic research differs from the practice of art or from art itself in that it presupposes an explicit research question.
> - _Epistemological_—I myself take this last position, though supplemented by a second central criterion: the result of the artistic research project is an _arti-fact_, whose format is itself an aspect of the process of artistic research and is first generated by it—and not predetermined as in the case of the sciences and the humanities, demanding a written text. The result is not necessarily a “finished” work of art or even a work of art at all plus a “scientific” or [p.201] “discursive text”, but rather an _arti-fact_ in the emphatic sense: _arti-fact_, _art- affect_, and _art-effect_ in one. It is this notion of arti-fact that opens new perspectives on the formats of artistic research, because its flexible plurifolded potential and form plays to practices of research and their results.

-- Schiesser, [@schiesser-2015-what pp.200-201]

---

_original source/found:_ unknown

_reference:_ Schiesser, G. (2015) ‘What Is at Stake: qu’est-ce que l’enjeu? Paradoxes: Problematics: Perspectives in Artistic Research Today’. in _Arts, Research, Innovation and Society_ [online] ed. by Bast, G., Carayannis, E., and Campbell, D. Champaign, Ill: Springer, 197–209. available from <[https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09909-5_11](https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-09909-5_11)> [10 February 2021]



