# knowledge verified and challenged

_previous note:_ [[art practice and artistic research]]

---

Linda Candy and Ernest Edmonds' chapter in _The Routledge Companion to Resarch in the Arts_ is about the role of the artefact in practice-research. Early in the writing, they state that the distinguishing feature of "practitioner research in the arts"[@candy_role_2010 p.120] is that making artefacts is both an integral part of the research and in generating new knowledge. Then they write:

>New knowledge generated by research, whether practice-based or not, is expected to have two characteristics: first that it is shared and second that it can be verified or challenged.[@candy_role_2010 p.121]

I propose that there has been systemic failure in practice-research to _generate knowledge_ that is able to be verified and challenged. What then is being produced if not _new knowledge_? Even if I were to say that we make possible _new understandings_ (and this would be my preference) then for our work to count as research then these understandings ought also to be subject to challenge and verification. 

I'm yet to see any such thing.

_questions & thoughts:_

--- 

_consider:_

- [[art as source of knowledge]]
- #finger-pointing-moon 
- #practice-research 


_source:_ [magee-2012-accountability.pdf](hook://file/mz8Ki68gv?p=RHJvcGJveC9iaWJsaW9ncmFwaHkgcGRmcw==&n=magee-2012-accountability.pdf)

_local link:_ [biggs-2010-routledge.pdf](hook://file/n0qxYpB1L?p=QWN0aW9uLzIwMjAwNzE0IC0gZG9jcyB0byBwcm9jZXNz&n=biggs-2010-routledge.pdf)

_citekey & zotero link:_ [@candy_role_2010](zotero://select/items/1_UK2YXWYG)

_reference:_ Candy, L., Edmonds, E., 2010. 'The Role of the Artefact and Frameworks for Practice-Based Research', in: Biggs, M., Karlsson, H. (Eds.), _The Routledge Companion to Resarch in the Arts_. Routledge, London, pp. 120–137.


