# somatics is the field which studies the soma

Thomas Hanna distinguishes between the body as observed from the outside (third-person perspective) and the soma as perceived from the inside (first-person perception). He says that somatics is "the field which studies the _soma_". [@hanna-1995-what p.341] The term _somatics_ was coined by Hanna in the 1970s "to describe and unify" [@eddy-2009-brief p.7] various processes which involved "listening deeply to the body."[@eddy-2009-brief p.6]

Hanna says the body and the soma are "categorically distinct"[@hanna-1995-what p.341] because the mode of perception is different: "immediate proprioception" that provides "unique data".[p.341]

> from a first-person viewpoint, quite different data are observed. The proprioceptive centers communicate and feed back immediate factual information on the continuous and unified past of the soma and its expectations for the future.[@hanna-1995-what p.343] 

> Body and soma are coequal in reality and value, but they are categorically distinct as observed phenomena. Somatics, then is a field of study dealing with somatic phenomena: i.e., the human being as experienced by himself from the inside.[@hanna-1995-what p.343]

Note also direct relationship between Hanna's work and Husserl's:
 > Hanna called the work ‘somatics’, expanding on ideas generated by Edward Husserl (founder of phenomenology, which involves the study of consciousness as experienced from the first-person point of view) (Johnson, 2004b).[@mullan-2014-somatics p.255]

- and link here between Husserl and Sheets-Johnstone in [[I move precedes I can]]. 

--- 

_thoughts & links_: 

- curious how Eddy says listening deeply to the _body_ and not the soma.
- [[human experience and language]]
- [[interoception science overview]]
- [[search for truth]]
- see [Batson's summary](zotero://select/items/1_39B8594Q) of Varela on p.77 of her book: "First-person experience should be the starting point for understanding cognition" 


---

_source:_ [loke_somatic_2018](zotero://select/items/1_6IERMMFC)

_[reference:](x-devonthink-item://EEBD3C8E-3DF4-4F83-A753-338602E541F6)_ Hanna, T., 1995. 'What is Somatics?'', in: Johnson, D.H. (Ed.), _Bone, Breath & Gesture: Practices of Embodiment_, North Atlantic Books ; California Institute of Integral Studies, Berkeley, Calif. : San Francisco, Calif, pp. 339–352.


