---
aliases: []
tags: []
author: "David Whyte"
year: "2014"
title: "The Three Marriages: Reimagining Work, Self and Relationship"
type: "literature"
status: "in-progress"
updated: "2021-11-16"
---

#  Whyte - The Three Marriages

> The marriage with the self is difficult because it is connected to the great questions of life that refuse to go away and which are also connected to our own mortality. In the silences that accompany a strong internal relationship with the self we see not only the truth of our present circumstances and a way forward but we also realize how short our stay is on this earth. Life waits for us in this internal marriage, but death waits for us also. The sudden absence of our partner waits for us. The end of our work or our retirement waits. The hospital bed waits. Right now, in some obscure medical appliance company in a corner of a bleak industrial estate, the very bed on which we will lie, trying to get the great perspective, is perhaps being manufactured as we read. We don’t want to know, of course, but all our great contemplative traditions concerned with this marriage, say, this willingness to look at the transitory nature of existence, are not pessimism but absolute realism: life is to be taken at the tilt, you do not have forever, and therefore why wait? Why wait, especially until your faculties have atrophied or your youth has gone, or you have lost confidence in your self? Why wait, to be, as the poet Mary Oliver says, “a bride to wonder”? To become a faithful and intimate companion to that initially formidable stranger you called your self?[@whyte-2014-three p.37]

> To study Buddhism we study the self  
> To study the self is to forget the self  
> To forget the self is to become  
> Enlightened by all thing

-- Dogen Zenji [@whyte-2014-three p.84]

> It is interesting to note that the dynamics of a true love, a true work and what, in Buddhism, has been called the true self, are essentially the same. None of them is amenable to command and control. We establish a relationship by in effect establishing a conversation with that tricky customer we happen to be involved with in that particular marriage. Tricky customer number one might be our spouse; tricky customer number two, our job; and trickiest customer of all, our self—and the last one, by the way, we seem to have the least choice over. [@whyte-2014-three p.84]

> ... no advice should ever be given to those in love. Blood should issue from our lips before we say a word of warning to friends, relatives or even our children. They will go their own way and cross any oceans in their way. Who, in that state, has ever listened to anything but what they wish to hear? [@whyte-2014-three p.119]

> In my busyness I was put off by an irresponsible sense [p.124] of repose on his part, a sense that he had plenty of the time that I did not have, which in some little place at the back of my mind irked me. Luckily, I was able to rise self-righteously above my self-righteousness and be impressed enough by his persistence to make room for the meeting. [@whyte-2014-three pp.123-124]

> He was called Shakyamuni, or Siddhartha, but he later became known as the Buddha because of his particular insight into suffering and anxiety and the way to live in and beyond its presence. It was a title particular to his insight and not to his person. The Buddha was not to be worshipped—Buddhism is not in fact, a form of worship; anyone who gained the same insight in the future would also be known as a Buddha. Everyone has Buddha nature; it is only a question of whether you can make yourself aware of it.[@whyte-2014-three p.176]

> You could say that meditation or silent prayer is the practice of [p.177] dwelling in this underlying un-anxious all-seeing, all-appreciating un-defensive self that does not care whether it lives or dies, while not taking our eyes off the world.[@whyte-2014-three pp.176-177]

> The interesting point is that if we continually watch our worries and turn ourselves into witnesses to their constant coming and going, and if we turn that self-observing faculty into a continuous exercise of attention, we are well on our way to becoming a Buddhist without having to bother with robes, shaved head or incense. To begin with, we just watch our thoughts and their constant attempts to keep us safe, and by doing that we have a possibility of living without being ruled by the worries we are observing. With daily practice a space seems to open up between the thoughts in which we get a glimpse, an intuition, a gravitational tug toward something else, something both emboldening and frightening. [@whyte-2014-three p.179]

> The pursuit of the self is also the pursuit of that part of us that is untouched by our successes and accomplishments. The marriages of relationship and work may bring us tangible outer gains, wonderful sex (at times), children, a house, money, recognition and the ability to help others through our actions, but the marriage with the self is the pursuit of a way of being that is so alive to all the phenomena of existence that it stops distinguishing so much between what is winning and what is losing.[@whyte-2014-three p.185]

> The pursuit of this super-self is difficult exactly because we cannot imagine what it would be like to be beyond winning and losing. In the pursuit of the self we cannot get there from here. We get there to begin with by stopping. [@whyte-2014-three p.185]

> The first experience is often a childlike sense of helplessness: my temptation to weep on the ledge, to go back to the mothering part of the world that doesn’t want you to live with the consequences of a full participation in life. To be a child is to be exempt from consequences, to hide out of sight and let another, more adult world explain us to a world that seems to threaten us.
> This concentrated sense of the self and its need to hazard itself in the world brings us to a difficult, fully adult understanding of existence that may come like a physical shock, that this self is not exempt from the fiercer aspects of mortality, that it can cease to exist, can die and pass away.[@whyte-2014-three p.255]

> What is defined as “I” before the relationship does not seem to survive its encounter with the other “I,” and to begin with, the new “we” seems to offer little in compensation.
> We often enter a marriage with images of how it will enhance our sense of self, increase the happiness we already possess and end a sense of aloneness. After the initial euphoria, we just as often find that in the marriage itself our sense of self is obliterated, our previous sources of happiness disappear and our sense of isolation is made more acute through the constant proximity of the other, their never-ending presence suddenly seeming to give us no time to think or gain a larger view.
 > What is difficult about the imagined happiness of marriage is the hard reality that both sides of the partnership have to rebuild their lives from the razed foundations of their former individual existences, and faced with this discovery we cannot really believe this radical rebuilding from scratch is necessary. We want to remain intact and untouched, and we soon intuit it is impossible. The temptation at this point is to hold our selves back from a full participation. Ironically, if we want to preserve ourselves we have to make a new home for that self and not retreat into the old house. Marriages often begin to fail when one side or the other refuses to begin building from this new, joint foundation but wants all the development on their previously planned side of the street.[@whyte-2014-three p.266]

> One of the tests of finding the right person is to ask ourselves if this is the particular form of selfishness and egotism we can live with. Considering the difficulties of marriage we might pose the question on a grander scale and ask if this is the particular form of insanity we can live with. A sign of possible success is our ability to answer in the affirmative. It means the chemistry is right, and also that we are looking not for perfection in our partner but for a mutual exploration of imperfections.[@whyte-2014-three p.269]

> Humor is a faculty that acknowledges our multilayered identities: that whatever context you have arranged for yourself on the surface, there is always another context that makes that original idea of your self, absurd. The promise to live with one other person for the rest of our lives is a very particular form of insanity itself from many perspectives.[@whyte-2014-three p.269]

> I have a good Irish friend who always says, when I have a troubled question about marriage and relationship, “Go against yourself.” It is very sound advice, well worth being calligraphied, framed, and placed on the kitchen wall above the scene where many of our attempted conversational breaks for freedom take place. To go against our selves in a relationship is to find another form of self that can grow without destroying the growth of the other.
 > The French philosopher Simone Weil had this to say about this fierce nexus of difficulty at the heart of “love,” this Vajrapani figure, standing fiercely at the entrance to love, fidelity and happiness in marriage and relationship: “What we love in other human beings is the hoped-for satisfaction of our desire, we do not love them for their desire. If what we loved in them was their desire, then we should love them as our self.”[@whyte-2014-three p.280]

> When a relationship stifles individual and essential wants and needs for too long the conversation always ceases to be real. The relationship also ceases to be real, the couple begins to dance ghost-like on the grave of their initial attraction to each other, an attraction that becomes increasingly abstract and increasingly built on the momentum of memory. We stop telling the story of our original meeting with any delight because [p.281] it ceases to have any real bearing on our day-to-day reality. Not that we can easily stop those ghostly dances and be paragons of truth and insight. But the very attempt to continually find out what the people might want for themselves is a generous and beneficial act that can often heal any previous neglect or undo the harm inflicted through a thoughtless dismissal of their desires.[@whyte-2014-three pp.280-281]

> Marriage is a long slow-motion goodbye, occurring even as the introductions are being made and the spark is being lit.[@whyte-2014-three p.284]

> In good work we occupy a frontier between what has been done and what is about to be done, both giving almost an equal sense of satisfaction. Each time we return to the work, that frontier is a little further out and a little nearer to accomplishing what we first set out to achieve. Like being in the midst of a growing family, we can sense the steadily growing satisfaction of a work slowly beginning to form: the coaxing of that work through all the setbacks and the dead ends, the final ability to bring it to a conclusion, and the sense of satisfaction we feel in finally sending it out in the world for others to examine and use, is one of the great privileges of having found a vocation to which we want to give ourselves wholeheartedly.[@whyte-2014-three p.309]

> It is possible to attain a state where we are free from suffering. We free ourselves from suffering by being fully in the conversation rather than something static having a conversation and trying to defend that something at every turn. Again, we can stop complaining about the weather, the guide and the lack of overnight accommodation in central Bhutan. As an individual, I must learn to identify my self with the bigger picture, a picture that includes the weather, the history of Himalayan Buddhist culture and its lack of emphasis on roadside accommodation. I must learn to live at a kind of frontier between what I think is me and what I think is not me, so that my identity is more of a meeting place; an edge between past and present rather than an island around which the events of life swirl and move on. Even the pouring rain is part of my identity, though if I have the choice, I may move out of it. Even grief and loss, if felt in a timeless way, can be free from disconnection or suffering. In summary: It is possible to be happy while cold, wet and exhausted.[@whyte-2014-three p.330]

> It is a difficult discipline in all three marriages to let a person go, continually, to see if that person comes back, to let a work go so that it can be reimagined or to let a fixed idea about ourselves evaporate and be replaced by something more flexible.
 > Establishing a marriage of marriages means not only that I start to learn from each of the marriages by letting them speak back to me in their own voices rather than make them say things I want them to say. It means also that I am willing to let each of the marriages speak to one another and, indeed, learn from one another.[@whyte-2014-three p.351]