

# Bauman - Does Ethics Have a Chance in a World of Consumers

> Immanuel Kant predicted more than two centuries ago that designing, elaborating, and putting into operation rules of mutual hospitality must at some point become a necessity for the human species, for we all inhabit the surface of a spherical planet, and that prediction has now been realized. Or rather the necessity has become the seminal challenge of our time, the one that calls for the most urgent and most thoroughly considered response.[@bauman-2008-does pp.9-10]

> As we try desperately to grasp the dynamics of planetary affairs today, our old and hard-dying habit of organizing the balance of power with the help of such conceptual tools as center and periphery, hierarchy, and superiority and inferiority serves more as a handicap than, as before, an asset; more as blinders than as searchlights.[@bauman-2008-does pp.11-12]

> In Chapter 3 I argue that the most consequential feature of a network is the formidable flexibility of its contents -- the extraordinary facility with which its composition may be, and tends to be, modified. If structures are all about comprising and enclosing, holding, keeping, restraining, containing, a network, in contrast, refers to the perpetual interplay of connecting and disconnecting. The process of "identity formation" becomes primarily an ongoing renegotiation of networks.[@bauman-2008-does p.13]

- So useful re identity markers. That identity is an "ongoing renegotiation of networks"[@bauman-2008-does p.13]. It's powerful because it resists the fixity of identity and the structures by which identity is constructed, held and protected. 

> There is no radical cure, at any rate, because the efforts of identity formation veer uneasily, as they must, between the two equally central human values of freedom and security.[@bauman-2008-does p.13]

- I wonder to what extent privacy here is enfolded into security? In the case of the two women dancing are they tending towards freedom or security? Perhaps they really have neither freedom nor security? Perhaps though, at least on the surface, their identity formation veers towards freedom. 

> In a liquid-modern society, swarms tend to replace groups, with their leaders, hierarchies, and pecking orders. A swarm can do without all those paraphernalia without which a group could not exist. Swarms need not be burdened by the group’s tools of survival: they assemble, disperse, and come together again from one occasion to another, each time guided by different, invariably shifting relevancies, and attracted by changing and moving targets.[@bauman-2008-does p.15]

> A swarm can be visualized best as being like Warhol’s endlessly copied images without an original, or with an original that was discarded and impossible to trace and retrieve. Each unit of the swarm reenacts the moves made by the others, while performing the whole job, from beginning to end and in all its parts, alone (in the case of consuming swarms, that job is the job of consuming).[@bauman-2008-does p.16] 

^b572cd

- the two women dancing are part of a consuming swarm.

> The product of self-creation, the process operated by the art of life, is supposed to be the "identity" of the creator. Given the oppositions that self-creation struggles in vain to reconcile, and the interplay between the constantly changing world and similarly unstable self-definitions of the individuals trying hard to catch up with the changing conditions, identity can’t be internally consistent, nor can it at any point exude an air of finality, leaving no room (and no urge) for further improvement. Identity is perpetually _in statu nascendi_, each of the forms it assumes suffering from more or less acute inner contradiction, each to a greater or lesser extent failing to satisfy and yearning for reform, each lacking in the self-confidence that could be offered solely by comfortingly long life expectancy.[@bauman-2008-does p.18]

> As Claude Dubar suggests, "Identity is nothing else but a result simultaneously stable and provisional, individual and collective, subjective and objective, biographical and structured, of diverse processes of socialization which at the same time construct the individuals and define the institutions."4 [@bauman-2008-does pp.18-19]

> De Singly rightly suggests that in theorizing about present identities, the metaphors of "roots" and "uprooting" (or, let me add, the related trope of "disembedding"), all implying the one-off nature of the individual’s emancipation from the community of birth as well as the finality and irrevocability of the act, are better abandoned and replaced by the tropes of dropping and weighing anchor.5 [@bauman-2008-does p.19]

> All in all, the anchor metaphor captures what the metaphor of "uprooting" misses or keeps silent about: the intertwining of continuity and discontinuity in the history of all or at least a growing number of contemporary identities.[@bauman-2008-does p.20]

> Paradoxically, emancipation of the self and its effective self-assertion need strong and demanding communities.[@bauman-2008-does p.20]

> The idea of an integrating community is a notion inherited from the now bygone panoptical era: it refers to the organized effort to fortify the borderline separating the "inside" from the "outside," to keep the inmates inside while barring the outsiders from entry and the insiders from deviating, breaching norms, and scheming to escape the grip of the routine. It refers to the enforcement of a uniform, monotonous, space- and time-ascribed code of conduct. That notion is associated with restrictions imposed on movement and change: an integrating community is essentially a conservative (conserving, stabilizing, routine-imposing, and preserving) force. It is at home in a strictly administered and tightly supervised and policed setting -- which hardly describes the liquid-modern world, with its cult of speed and acceleration, novelty, and change for the sake of changing.[@bauman-2008-does p.21]

> The supraindividual "totalities" to which the mainstream individuals offer their allegiance at some stage of their life (only to withdraw it at the next stop or a stop after the next), are anything but integrating communities: they do not monitor the human traffic at their fringes, they do not register those who cross borders in either direction, and are hardly aware of the individual decisions to "join" or "leave" -- and they do not run the offices that could seriously engage in all that monitoring, registration, and recording. Rather than integrating those currently "belonging," these entities are being "integrated" (though in an admittedly loose and easily arrested and reversed manner) by individual offers of allegiance -- from the moment the offers begin to flow in, that is, and until the start of a massive desertion.[@bauman-2008-does p.22]

> There is another seminal difference between the references to contemporary-style "belonging" and the orthodox "integrating communities." To quote Kaufmann once more -- "a large part of the identification process feeds on rejection of the Other."7 [@bauman-2008-does p.22]

> Identification of an adversary is an indispensable element of identification with an "entity of belonging" -- and, through the latter, also a crucial element of self-identification. Identification of an enemy construed as an incarnation of the evil against which the community "integrates," gives clarity to life purposes and to the world in which life is lived.[@bauman-2008-does p.23]

> For the art of life, this new setting opens unprecedented vistas. Freedom of self-creation has never before achieved a similarly breathtaking scope -- simultaneously exciting and frightening. Never before was the need for orientation points and guidance as strong and as painfully felt. Yet never before were firm and reliable orientation points and trustworthy guides in such short supply (at least in relation to the volume and intensity of need). Let me be clear: there is a vexing shortage of _firm and reliable_ orientation points, _trustworthy_ guides.[@bauman-2008-does p.24]

> Indeed, globalization looks now inescapable and irreversible. The point of no return has been reached -- and passed. There is no way back. Our interconnections and interdependence are already global. Whatever happens in one place influences the lives and life chances of people in all other places. Calculation of steps to be taken in any one place must reckon with the responses of people everywhere else. No sovereign territory, however large, populous, and resourceful, can single-handedly protect its living conditions, its security, long-term prosperity, preferred form of life, or the safety of its inhabitants. Our mutual dependency is planetwide and so we are already, and will remain indefinitely, objectively responsible for one another. There are, however, few if any signs that we who share the planet are willing to take up in earnest the subjective responsibility for that objective responsibility of ours.[@bauman-2008-does p.26]

> Like everything else once securely located in that sphere, models of a good life have now become the game and prey of lone rangers, hunters, and trappers -- and have become some of the many spoils of deregulation, privatization, individualization, of the conquest and annexation of the public by the private. The grand social vision has been split into a multitude of individual and personal, strikingly similar but decidedly not complementary portmanteaus. Each one is made to the measure of consumers’ bliss -- meant, like all consumer joys, for utterly individual, lonely enjoyment even when relished in company.[@bauman-2008-does p.28]

> Also a truly planetary responsibility: acknowledgment of the fact that all of us who share the planet depend on one another for our present and our future, that nothing we do or fail to do is indifferent to the fate of anybody else, and that no longer can any of us seek and find private shelter from storms that originate in any part of the globe.[@bauman-2008-does p.29]

