# Andy Crouch - The Life We Are Looking For

> But all this will come at the expense of what she was looking for the day she was born, what we were all looking for—because before we knew to look for a mirror, we were looking for another person’s face.

>  The late Leanne Payne, a teacher of the spiritual life, once said, “We either contemplate or we exploit.” Exploitation asks, What can this person (or for that matter, this thing) do for me? Contemplation asks, Who or what am I beholding, without regard for their usefulness to me? My image bearer exercise was a small attempt to contemplate—to actually attend and behold and name the dignity of each person I passed. But the exercise also felt tragic, because while there is something elevating and hopeful about naming each person you pass in this way, there is also an inescapable sense of loss, of something unfulfilled, undiscovered, or perhaps abandoned long ago.

> My world is full of people, indeed more full than any human being before the last few crowded centuries could have possibly imagined. But it does not feel like a world of persons. In this small distinction between people and persons is condensed the story of what we have found and lost.

> First, as the German philosopher Robert Spaemann put it, there is a difference between “something” and “someone.” The difference is personhood. Philosophers might say it is ontological—rooted in our being—and inalienable—it cannot be taken away. 

> So, while nothing can truly take away our personhood, only another person can fully give it to us. This is the second essential truth. It is when another person’s face and voice recognize us, not for what we can offer them (exploitation) but for what we intrinsically are (contemplation), that we know who we are. We are meant to know that we are persons in and through the recognition of others. In the end, we are not individuals. Only when we know and are known by others can we become fully ourselves.

> The psychiatrist Curt Thompson speaks movingly about this fundamental human drama. Even in the most loving homes—in fact, a home is not fully loving if this does not happen—the parent withdraws. They leave the room for a moment; they leave the house for a day. The face and presence that anchored the child’s sense of self is gone.
> If all is well, the parent returns, and the dance of persons—each responding to the other in full—is reestablished. But the drama has been set in motion. What do we do when the persons who matter most in our life depart? How, then, do we know who we are? And what will we do if they do not return?

> The Japanese theologian Kosuke Koyama provocatively called three miles an hour “the speed of God” since it was the speed at which Jesus of Nazareth moved for almost his entire life. 

> We flatter ourselves that we live in a “developed” world—but it is an adapted world, a lopsided world. And it is a lonely world because the one thing that you cannot enhance, supercharge, or outsource in human life is the one thing we most need: the patient process of search and recognition, absence and return, rupture and repair that adds up to being known. 

> The alchemists considered themselves to be performing magic—not in the sense of impressive or charming tricks, but in the sense of unlocking and acquiring the ability to command nature. The word command is essential. Magic is not essentially about understanding the world, especially if we note that word’s humble implication that true knowledge involves “standing under” something. Magic is about standing over, not under. At the heart of magic is the belief that, given the right code words—“abracadabra” being the schoolchild’s imitation of the magician’s incantation—a human being can gain unquestioned control of the forces at the heart of the cosmos.

> Or, as Goethe put it, in words that every German speaker knows by heart, Die ich rief, die Geister, / Werd ich nun nicht los. “The spirits which I have summoned / I now cannot banish.”

> Money is the culmination, and the engine, of a world of impersonal power. If I have money—and almost everything in the modern world depends on that if—I can live the dream of the sorcerer’s apprentice, or indeed the sorcerer himself, conjuring up the goods and services I require and desire without entangling myself with the personalities and needs of other people. If I cannot yet turn anything into gold, at least I can turn my money into almost anything I want. Whatever you desire in this world, there is almost certainly someone who, whether legally or not, will find a way to give it to you—if you have money. And money is one thing our world has more of than it has ever had.

> This is why technology, adopted with such enthusiasm for its potential for human flourishing, so often seems to go strangely off the rails. As the Christian theologian Craig Gay perceptively observes in his book Modern Technology and the Human Future, technology does not exist primarily, and never existed primarily, to serve us or support “ordinary embodied human existence.” Rather, Gay argues, it has always been developed to serve first and foremost the generation of economic profit—whether or not it also contributes to real, personal flourishing.

> What technology wants is really what Mammon wants: a world of context-free, responsibility-free, dependence-free power measured out in fungible, storable units of value. And ultimately what Mammon wants is to turn a world made for and stewarded by persons into a world made of and reduced to things.

> Every attempt to implement machine learning will come at the cost of removing features of personhood from the world. Already, the cost of housing in person-scale environments like the neighborhood where Jacobs herself lived—Manhattan’s Greenwich Village—has soared beyond the reach of almost everyone, leaving those with more modest means to move to places dominated by highways. More and more of human life will be consigned to environments that work better for machines, and for Mammon, than for persons—environments, like a modern warehouse, full not of gloriously transfigured persons exercising godlike powers but of diminished laborers trying to stay out of the way of boring robots.

> So, rather than actually creating machines that understand the infinitely creative and complex world of human culture, we will find that it is far easier to create attenuated cultural environments that treat persons like machines. Which is what Mammon has wanted all along.

> Furthermore, human babies accomplish all this cognition with the roughly one-hundred-watt power supply of the human body (a single training run for GPT-3, one set of researchers estimated, consumes 189,000 kWh of power, roughly what a human being would consume over an entire lifetime). How would we ever engineer a silicon-based system to use so little power to mobilize curiosity, engage relationally, and infer effortlessly from a few examples the shape of the learner’s world? Now we truly seem in the realm of the inconceivable.

> My friend Dave Murray, whom I will write more about in the coming pages, has spent his life as an instrument maker and builder of small businesses in some of the hardest places in the world. He was shaped in his youth by a kind of Christianity that aspired to impact culture, but he has come to have a different picture of his work and mission. “Most of us want to be a force,” Dave says. “But Jesus calls us to be a taste.”

> Mammon, however, has done a far better job of shattering bonds and dissolving traditional culture than the Christians ever aspired to do. Where we will meet resistance is more likely in the effort to rebuild lasting commitments, anchored in something other than isolated individuals and their preferences. Our households will be accused of violating not pietas but libertas, the freedom from obligation and dependence that is the highest good of an impersonal world. The conviction that “you are not your own,” to borrow the title of Alan Noble’s book on this subject, is radical and threatening to the god of this age.

> Wherever policy is made and preferences are shaped by the dream of escaping the vulnerabilities, givenness, and interdependence of human life, our bodies will be despised and those who treat embodied persons with reverence will be mocked.

> So we have to settle in. We have to prepare for “a long obedience in the same direction,” to use the strangely apropos phrase of Nietzsche. As the technological world measures effectiveness in shorter and shorter durations and as the unit of time between stimulus and response shrinks in both public life and our own twitchy inner lives, we will be learning to move in the opposite direction.