---
aliases: []
tags: []
type: "literature"

---

# Kent De Spain - Landscape of the Now

_previous note:_ [[losing oneself]]

Lisa Nelson: A lot of what people call improvising, I call "dancing." I wouldn't put it in the category of improvising. When I think about improvising, it's already another stage or another phase of a dancing urge, and it has to do with making something. So, maybe every time I use the word improvising, it's synonymous with making something. I usually start from dancing and then I apply very simple filters to notice what's interesting me at the time, and I would say this would be the same in any choreographic process. So the improvisational agenda is a choreographic urge to make something visible that I feel is happening, that's interesting.[@despain-2014-landscape p.39]


Lisa Nelson: The strategies that I have taken internally have changed quite a bit. They've continued to morph as my body has gotten less responsive to my thoughts—or maybe not less responsive—my body has gotten less unruly, and so the provocation of accidents that bring me to other states and other solutions, quick solutions to things, it doesn't happen as often because my body doesn't take certain risks. So that kind of area of physical unruliness, as it started to diminish, made me have to search for something else. And space has always been something that's very, very palpable to me, probably because my vision has been so dominant in my dancing. So space had been a very ubiquitous awareness in constructing action—close to me, far away—but now it's boiled down to attention and to what I'm aware of. I'm hyper-aware of the physical sensation of attention shifting, and somehow that has provoked enough movement or action. So the strategies that I'm finding to define for myself, limitations that make my action have different qualities, they're now all in the attentional realm.[@despain-2014-landscape p.39]


Steve Paxton: So the content is flexible. It depends on the context. The process itself is the same. No matter how the context changes around it, I'm still in a state of response and I am following my experience, rather than jumping ahead of it or worrying about it. I'm just following the experience, and as I'm following the experience, I'm also saturated by the experience, in that there is no part of me— I'm talking about a good moment—there's no part of me that's elsewhere.[@despain-2014-landscape p.41]


Kent De Spain: Early in the practice of improvisation, it is easy to be completely consumed by the now. There is so much going on, so many possible choices, so much sensory information coming in through your nervous system, it is all you can do to keep your wits about you and just keep moving. With more practice, the world slows down for you, and you have more attention that you can use to gain a greater understanding of your own experience. It's like learning to ski. At first you are just trying to keep from falling down. Soon you can change directions a little and look up at the horizon instead of down at the tips of your skis. Eventually you can begin to choose where you want to go and notice and adjust the details of how you are getting there. Not everything is a choice because you are also responding to gravity, and the shape of the mountain, and the conditions of the snow, and the other people on the slopes; but you can actually pay attention to them now. The question becomes, How do you use that shiny new attentional capacity, now that you have it? Part of what you can do with it is keep track of what is happening.[@despain-2014-landscape p.47]


Lisa Nelson: So tracking has been one of my habits, my cultivated instinctual skills. Tracking time, use of time; tracking space, use of space; tracking attention, shift; because the observation of my output is probably my major activity when I'm improvising, what I can perceive or imagine or pretend is being sensed or sensible from somebody els's point of view. And then, of course, this kind of überscore that I made, this group activity, this tuning activity, communication system, it depended on tracking. Although each individual did not have to track, somehow they would get called on their output, so it almost was a tracking activity, tracking exercise. So, time, space in all its dimensions: near/far, low/high, back/forward, upside down... however you could prismatically look at space, or presume what people were perceiving. Tracking what's seen and what's visible, what's visible and unseen. If I'm not tracking, I'm not improvising. I'm dancing.[@despain-2014-landscape p.49]


Barbara Dilley: I think tracking is a training, and as a teacher of improv, I'm training that in specific ways. In a meditative language, you are learning to layer through familiarity, through repetition of improvisational practices, mindfulness of what it is that you are doing, establishing a comfort with the flow of energy in a moving body. I work with these three little disciplines—slowness, stillness, and repetition—as a way of slowing down the nervous system to allow tracking and, again, to soothe a kind of excitation that I think is inherent in improvisation; that it rides on speed. It can accumulate a kind of speed which then inhibits tracking. So then you bring that individual environment into relationship with other, and that's a very big landscape.[@despain-2014-landscape p.49]


Kent De Spain: It would be easy to say that it lives in the movement that billows forth from the improvisers). But I think it is safe to say that many experienced practitioners would agree that it is as much about mind as movement. To improvise—-and I might also say to view improvisation-is to come into contact with the mind of movement and the movement of mind. But the improvising mind does not necessarily follow a Cartesian model. In fact, I would suggest that there might be no human activity that more thoroughly destabilizes the classic mind/body dualism. Spend enough time in the hyper-awareness of improvisation and you will undoubtedly begin to question such things as the nature of thought, or the source of desire, or even the structure of self. You will sense yourself thinking in movement. You will feel and respond to what your mind wants, or what your back wants, or even what the space wants. And you will know that you do not end at the boundary of your skin. You are literally a part of the world, and the world permeates your soma, thinking and choosing from inside of you.[@despain-2014-landscape p.52]


Barbara Dilley: I think that the question of what does one think about is fascinating. I'm not sure I can really say what I think about. It's very freeing to me because there's some almost in-between place of thinking and words and doing and response. It's like a fourth dimension, almost, that happens for me when I'm improvising. It's this place where my tracking awareness is very light-hearted and flowing. And so the thinking and the doing and the talking and the being and the choices become almost as if, in an ideal situation, I'm not making the decisions. I do actually note certain experiences in a thinking voice. [@despain-2014-landscape p.55]


Anna Halprin: When you are working in the studio by yourself, you are just trying things out. The moment of truth comes when the audience is there. But if I were to be concerned about whether they liked it or not, I wouldn't be able to feel the same way, because that would be a terrible distraction. And I don't get nervous. I used to, but since I really learned how to give up judgment—I don't judge myself and I don't judge others—I don't get nervous. What is there to get nervous about? I do my job. [@despain-2014-landscape p.62]


Barbara Dilley: The gaze raises the issue of self-consciousness, so there is a lot of interesting and undeveloped territory there for me. One question is, Is self-consciousness really a problem? What is that self-conscious state when one is inhibited? And what is that self-conscious state when one is simply highly aware and the self is part of that awareness? There is a series that Trungpa Rinpoche goes through, aspects of his process for creative work: you create space; find an absence of neurosis; and become "thoroughly relaxed and wholesome." We have latched onto that phrase. What is it to be thoroughly relaxed and wholesome? What is the kinesthetic experience of personal anxiety, and how do we work with that? Coming from this world of contemplative experience that I've been dwelling in all these years, I view performance as essentially an offering of one human being to another. So how do we set ourselves up to make this offering as cleanly, directly, and without self-consciousness as we can? It's a practice. So I'm interested now in the improvisator actually making a deeper commitment to being seen— doing it through personal ritual and through group ritual— to see what that brings.[@despain-2014-landscape p.63]


Kent De Spain: In the beginning, improvisation tends to feel chaotic much of the time. It is a roller coaster ride designed by a mad genius. After years of honing your awareness and achieving some level of comfort in the madness, your practice might swing the other way, becoming thoughtful, even careful. But be wary of control. For me, there is little joy in "mastering" the moment. The continuing thrill of improvisation comes, instead, from finding the right balance between clarity and hysteria, with occasional longer forays into either extreme. Performance adrenaline and the exchange of attention with a n audience can both help and hinder that balance. I encourage improvisers to take every chance that they can to be seen, be it one friend i n the studio or an audience of a thousand, and to let those viewers be energetic participants, not just passive voyeurs, in the creation of their improvised world.[@despain-2014-landscape p.67]


Deborah Hay: I never even think about the word intention. I'm not even sure I know what it means in terms of performance or practice or choreography. There's no time for intention. There's only time to notice what's happening now, and now, and now, and now, and now. My whole sense of performance is that my recognizing these moments passing one after the other after the other, being there to recognize them, that the audience sees that too. Even in the dancing of it, it feels like a magic show. (Deborah's eyes widen into a face of concentrated wonder.) It's that place, and there's not even time to go (returns to that face again), there's only time to just kind of (she speaks a series of sounds under her breath, with an expression of constant activity). I must say that there is no intentionality in my practice.[@despain-2014-landscape p.70]


Steve Paxton: You can intend as much as you want. I don't think there's any reason not to include intentional material [but] I don't know if that particular bit of material would be improvised. What I try to do is to not intend and to find out.[@despain-2014-landscape p.70]


Ruth Zaporah: But otherwise I find myself doing things. That's really what it is, that there's somebody in there, back here again, neocortex, saying, "Wow, where did this come from? This is amazing. Wow. Wooo!" I could be doing the most devastating, heart-wrenching situation, but there's also this kid that's excited about it inside of me. Not judging it, just inside of the ride and having a fabulous time. So, there's no intending on a good night.[@despain-2014-landscape p.71]


Kent De Spain: In my research I sometimes verbalize and record my thoughts as I am moving t o get a peek inside my process. Even i n solo practice my statements make it clear that, at times, I am the protagonist or instigator of the action ("I'm tired and I want to stop" or "I am sitting on the floor and just feel like rocking, like davening"). At other times, I am not the protagonist (I am being pulled along the diagonal" or "That walking pattern has appeared again"). Perhaps this is my own "illusion of intentionality" because I am clearly the only one in the room. But the experience is profound and undeniable—sometimes I am acting, sometimes I am responding, and sometimes I am being acted upon—and it reveals so much about how we interact with the world around us. It is both frightening (I am not the source of all of my actions) and incredibly liberating (I don't have to be the source of all of my actions). And in that space between freedom and control is a landscape of rich possibilities. If you turn your awareness to the source of your movements and desires, what do you find? And what is the difference between the kinds of things you choose to do and the kinds of things that are "chosen" for you?[@despain-2014-landscape p.72]


Kent De Spain: As we will see, for many of these practitioners, what is good is an improvisation free of thoughts about what is good. If they engage with the question at all, they do so after a practice or performance. As an example, Anna Halprin uses her well-known reciprocal process of performance and evaluation known as the RSVP Cycles.[@despain-2014-landscape p.73]


Kent De Spain: You would rarely be wowed by their physical virtuosity but, if you knew what you were looking at, you could certainly be wowed by their attentional virtuosity. The content of much of their work exists at ground level: humans, moving, supremely alive in and engaging with the experience of the moment. No stories. No pirouettes. No frills. Just people.[@despain-2014-landscape p.74]


Kent De Spain: I think it is important to note that neither of these artists wants to hear anything about what great movers they are. Instead, they want to know that the audience found a way to connect to the subtle and complex worlds that they construct and inhabit in performance. Because the sample size of this interview project is small and relatively homogenous, it is difficult to know whether this disinterest in movement virtuosity is a sign of more sophisticated improvising, a characteristic of this specific genre of improvisational practice (postmodern, post-Judson), or the result of all of these artists being over sixty years old. Perhaps it is all of those things to some degree. Regardless, it is clear that what is "good" for these improvisers falls outside the virtuosic mainstream of much of Western concert dance. They want the audience to look in a different way.[@despain-2014-landscape p.75]


Barbara Dilley: I think, in a group situation, an ensemble situation, there is this creating of what I call "group mind." And good becomes a place where there's some kind of agreement about when something is heightened and when it is relaxed or softened, and then when it dissipates and when it ends. Good in a solo environment leaves no residue. I end it without feeling like something's sticking on me. So it has a sense of clean. It's good if I have not been highly tricked by myself into self-consciousness or uncertainty or doubt; I've been able to ride those energies so that, when I end it, I don't have a lot of memory. I'm not thinking about it afterwards. That's good, on a solo level.[@despain-2014-landscape p.77]


Steve Paxton: I know what "best" is for me. Best is fleeting seconds when my body takes over, and I suddenly realize that my imagery and my desires, whatever they might be, these little sprits of "now some arms maybe" or "now a time to run to the other side of the stage," the little things that happen stop happening, and the body's just going and enjoying itself. You know, quite happily moving as though the mind has just been surgically removed or something. That "free at last" kind of feeling.[@despain-2014-landscape p.77]


Anna Halprin: And you say, what worked, what didn't work, what would I like more of, what would I like less of, this gives me an idea, let's incorporate this. [Then] you go back to Resources. All of your, "I like this," "this worked," "I don't like this," "this didn't work," becomes a resource. I do that all the time. One person maybe in a group of ten will do something and I'll say, "Wow, I didn't think of that." I'll feed that back to the group. So when the Valuaction comes you say, "You know, this score generated a lot of new ideas." So Resources are very important, that you get all the Resources out of your Valuaction. Do you know why we call it Valuaction, instead of evaluation? Because it means that you find the value of what you've done and then you take action by recycling it.[@despain-2014-landscape p.79]


Kent De Spain:  When you turn your awareness in toward yourself, you come into contact with a mélange of flesh and breath and mind and desire and everything else that resides in there. When, instead, you turn your senses out toward the world around you, you find yourself bathing in unending stimulation from the space and people and sounds and energies that compose the life beyond your skin. Then there is the connection, the interaction, the blurry melding of the inside and the outside when the conceptual walls that separate and delineate who we are and who we are not become porous. Surely the infinite potential of these realms provides a lifetime of resources from which to improvise.[@despain-2014-landscape p.81]


Kent De Spain: When I have engaged deeply in improvisation, noticing and dancing with the worlds inside and outside, I cannot deny that I have come into contact with that which is not recognizably from either of those worlds. Different people, different cultures, have different names or concepts for this experience. In the last chapter, Simone Forti talked about duende, the dark spirit that imbues Flamenco dancers with passion and power. In Bali, the word taks refers to creativity that emerges from being filled or possessed by the gods. In several religions from West Africa and the African diaspora, the orishas are spirits that possess and dance through the bodies of their human hosts. And tens of thousands of American Christians embody the divine every week through various forms of Praise Dance. Whether you recognize the existence of "that which is beyond" is a personal choice, but there is no denying that it has been a major force in inspiring and guiding movement throughout what we know of human history.[@despain-2014-landscape p.81]


Barbara Dilley: Well, my journey brought me into an environment where that was discussed and talked about, that there was presence of the unseen realm, or another way I've learned to talk about it is an open dimension, and that there was an energetic response and an energetic presence available at all times. When I first started studying and learning about this in the context of the Buddhist dharma and the Shambhala Buddhist teachings, it addressed a kind of gap I felt that I had sensed, that improvisation was this potentially shamanic activity, but that I didn't really know how to work with that or how to train with that. Being around someone like Trungpa Rinpoche, there was an invitation to understand that or to study about that [p.83] because the unseen realm was always so active around him at al times, although he didn't make it into a commodity. It was something that one learned about directly through experience. So my journey has been very much about how do I do this? How do actually invite this, without either making myself somebody who knows all about it, or implies that this is what makes art important, because I don't feel that the transpersonal is necessarily what somebody has to judge themselves as having or not having, because frankly I think it's always present in art.[@despain-2014-landscape pp.82-83]

Barbara Dilley: So the way Trungpa Rinpoche would talk about it is that, once we create a certain kind of environment that is open and relaxed and uplifted and about the basic goodness of being born humans, the Dralas arrive and they are there to play with us. It's that simple. The challenge is that we live in a culture where that is a huge leap for people because it's often crossing the barrier into what people call religion, and there's a lot of confusing and mixed experiences there. Many of us don't have the skills to do it so that it is all-encompassing and welcoming to differences and so forth. So it's challenging to bring it in, but I believe that, for me, improvisation has really been about [whether] I can invite that partnership at all times, and I've held back in my life from going more fully into it because of the teachings that I was given.[@despain-2014-landscape p.83]


Deborah Hay: With a question—let's say, What if now is here?—I feel like I am making room for the presence of those connections. And it's completely nonspecific, but it's the presence of those connections. And the questions that I ask are ones that indeed make room for those (connections), that expand the territory. It just enlarges the practice of dance for me. I think it's Bachelard who talks about the "consciousness of enlargement," and that's where I feel like you're talking about spirituality or mysticism. I think my work, quite unintentionally, has grown to demand of me a consciousness of enlargement. I mean, where else do you go? I can't go into my body. The physical body, thank god for it, but it is becoming more limited in what it can do. So the consciousness of enlargement allows me to work with material where I don't have to focus so heavily on the self and the body moving. So I would say it's quite present in my work more and more.[@despain-2014-landscape p.84]

Lisa Nelson: What is dancing actually? My experience separates it completely from improvising, which is to make something. But to dance is not to make something. To dance is to channel, and you don't have to know what you're channeling. It's something that moves you that's invisible. You're following something. You're being moved by something. So that is a very big question. I'm so grateful when I see someone dancing in anything: improvising, doing choreography, whatever. I think there's an instant [p.85] recognition of somebody who is actually dancing. If I set up an improvisation, what I would like to be able to achieve is to dance it. That's always the equation. It's very hard, I find. Maybe it's something we just don't talk about in Western dance. I try to talk about dancing, which I think is synonymous with...well, it's a spiritual act. That's what I think dancing is. It might be because the doorway in talking about improvisation as if it's a specific thing might drive everybody to a more analytical frame of mind, so then it's harder to analyze it. Maybe it precludes analysis. But it's a really central question for all of us.[@despain-2014-landscape pp.84-85]

Nancy Stark-Smith: Another one of these nonsequential aspects is what we've been calling "gap," and you could say that it might be a very momentary or longer, not absence of reference points, but a low level of reference points, so that you're not really oriented somehow. And for some people, they live for this. This is like bliss and freedom. (For] other people, it's panic. So what do you do in the gap? Breathing is useful because—and again I'm making this up—it does seem to keep things moving, keep the life force moving along and perceiving things so that you can accumulate information and then at a certain point get oriented if that's what you want. But very often people will put into the gap something that they're familiar with, just to take the gap away. There are different strategies, as we know. Streaming does have a kind of energetic quality and sometimes we talk about arriving physically into sensation and arriving energetically, into presence, into awareness, in the moment.[@despain-2014-landscape p.85]


Steve Paxton: I don't think I believe any more in the individual. I was raised on the individual. That was a big thing that we were supposed to become in my life, and you were supposed to "find yourself" and all of that. So I looked around. And it's a long search because the thing you're looking for is a moving target. Am I the source? I am the source to the degree that I fail, that's really clear. Not fail exactly, but fail in my aspirations. I mean, the reason I stopped the Goldberg was because it had become so popular that I was having to perform it too much and I was failing to change enough in between its expression. So I was stuck with my body, in a way. The body is a thing of habit and the senses are things of habit and that's what technical work gets you out of. Maybe spirituality has something to do with bringing things to consciousness but not in a willful way. So instead of being a "self" willing a thing to happen, I become more an interior kind of plurality that's observing what happens and then crafting the improvisation, crafting the actual performance, which has to do with tipping balances a little bit one way or the other with your consciousness.[@despain-2014-landscape p.88]


Kent De Spain: It is quite reasonable to begin an examination of the resources for improvisation with a discussion of the human body. Our bodies are both a moving conduit for the flow of information and the fleshy core of our expressive selves. As with many of the resources under scrutiny here, parsing our bodies from our senses or our bodies from our movements is both arbitrary and philosophically questionable. And yet, I can, with my attention, flip a switch back and forth — object, subject, object, subject— and dance the Cartesian tango. But let us not fool ourselves. In the now of improvisation, my body—with its weight and mass, its flesh/bones/breath/blood, its electrochemical pathways—is omnipresent. It is both what I feel and how I feel. In fact, it is not an it. "It" is me. And how I situate my consciousness i n relation to that aspect of myself is just an example of the "interior plurality" that Steve Paxton so eloquently described in the last chapter.[@despain-2014-landscape p.90]


Lisa Nelson: Change. I'm hoping that my body isn't necessary to keep on dancing with. I'm discovering that as my body is getting less and less central to my [work], or available, I'm still finding new things about dancing.[@despain-2014-landscape p.95]


Barbara Dilley: (The body) is the great playground: its weight, its mass, its systems, the nervous system, the sensations of stretch and release, and the mystery of chi energy moving. How it is heavy or light, becomes delighted in repetitive activity, kind of sings through repetition; is tricky, a trickster.[@despain-2014-landscape p.95]


Kent De Spain: Movement—subtle or extreme, gestural or locomotor, intentional or accidental—is the medium through which the improvisation is experienced, by both the improviser and the audience. It is also the lens through which that audience can view the inner world of the mover. Sometimes, while improvising, we focus on and manipulate the kinesthetic power and pleasure and interest of movement for movement's sake. At other times we turn our attention to other aspects of the process and let the movement take care of itself. But the feedback loop of improvisation—cycling from sources to actions to how our responses to those actions become new sources—always passes through movement.[@despain-2014-landscape p.97]


Barbara Dilley: You know, the whole practice of siting in a posture watching the breath move was a very profound experience for me as a kind of addicted improvisator. The constraint of that posture and of having to then begin to notice the moving mind, al that has ben so profoundly engaging for me. There's a part of the teachings on the nature of mind that talks about mind actually coming to stillness, and so there's a finger pointing in that direction. Once you engage in any kind of meditative training, what you work with is the moving mind and essentially the still posture, which itself becomes not that still. So I'm getting fascinated in the micromovement, the experience of the still posture of meditation, which has been pointed to in the West through the work of Feldenkrais and Alexander and Body Mind Centering and any of those investigations into the moving practices of the body. So movement, to me, has gotten to be very much about the relationship between when nothing is happening and when something is happening. When that occurs for me, it doesn't take much. Movement is happening all the time. It's stillness that is the quest.[@despain-2014-landscape p.98]


Ruth Zaporah: Movement is interesting because I can do an improvisation sitting just like this and not moving, although this is moving, this mouth is moving, the breath is moving, everything else is moving. I mean, nothing doesn't move, ever. So it's how focused you are. Even if I'm perfectly still, I'm tracking movement that's inside. Movement can be very useful as a vocabulary, but it's also the hum underneath, just like the breath is the hum.[@despain-2014-landscape p.98]


Lisa Nelson: These days movement is less interesting to me than dancing, and it comes up a lot in my teaching, to discriminate, with the people I'm working with, the difference between moving and dancing. The difference is very apparent to me. In dancing, as I was saying before, dancing is not something that is governed by awareness, or by attention. It's an experience of being moved. It's not that you can't layer a certain awareness onto it, but a lot of the time in teaching I find it's very difficult for people to find the transition from moving to dancing. And it's a lot about how they're focusing their minds, their attention. So now, in some of my shorter workshops, I sacrifice fifteen minutes a day to dancing, and put on music of any kind. And each of us sees if we achieve dancing by the end of the fifteen minutes. And a lot of it depends on anybody's connection to the music, whether they can get there or not. Suddenly I'm realizing I'm starting to sound like "god is music," you know, the thing that moves you. But I probably believe that.[@despain-2014-landscape p.99]

Kent De Spain: One of the primary experiences derived from attention to the senses is the understanding that they are not just the information they produce. Senses are, as J. J. Gibson describes them, "perceptual systems" that require much more bodily involvement than just eyes or ears or tongue. In fact, the process of sensing requires a complex, coordinated effort on the part of the skeletal, muscular, and nervous systems to gather and transmit the information necessary to, for example, read the words on this page. The actions needed to read-holding the book in position and shifting the direction and focus of the eyes—go unnoticed in the quest for comprehension, but in the quiet moments of an improvisation, with your sensitivity dialed up high, you can feel the discrete components of a "simple" act of [p.103] vision as the delicate dance they really are. You also notice the movements that produce sensory activity making up a surprisingly large portion of your total movement output, thus inviting or even requiring a much fuller conscious attention to how that movement integrates with the other movement you produce.[@despain-2014-landscape pp.102-103]

Nancy Stark Smith: Those are some of the tools, the main tools, whether it's hearing or seeing or thinking. You throw one little seed of orientation into people working through sensation, and they can go with that for a very long time. Again, what are the proportions? How much thinking, and how much feeling or sensing? I think sensing, in the sort of way that Bonnie Cohen is using (the term], is a certain kind of activity of the nervous system, as I understand it. So it creates a certain kind of attention and a certain kind of movement which might be different than experiencing the body in different ways—if we don't want to call it sensing, or she might say that feeling is different than sensing, and I don't know enough about how to define those two, what defines them. So there are many different ways to feel the body, but the use of the senses is important in reading the environment, internally and externally, and therefore knowing how to proceed.[@despain-2014-landscape p.105]


Kent De Spain: One of Dilley's eye practices is Infant Eyes, eyes that do not already have a knowledge of and history with what they see. How different the world is (and our movement relationship to it) when we are discovering it for the very first time. This practice brings us back to the interdependence of concept and percept in two different ways: first, we see that imposing a concept on our sensory processes allows us to filter or alter what we perceive; and second (hauntingly, if we really believe in this interdependence), we must admit that information from our senses for which we do not have a concept cannot actually be perceived, or it must be transformed, translated, forced to fit the concepts that we already possess.[@despain-2014-landscape p.106]


Kent De Spain: Space is determined by the actions of the improvisers. I do not need a theater or studio to improvise. I can immediately transform any space—a bathroom, a sidewalk, a church—into a performance space simply by beginning to improvise there, and you cannot see that space solely as it was until I end or leave. I can, by my actions, transform any space into a place of grieving or exuberance, a place of physical exertion, a place to see and be seen; in essence, to colonize any space and plant the flag of humans. In fact, it may be that only by the thought and action of humans can a
"space" become a "place."[@despain-2014-landscape p.110]


Steve Paxton: It's a discipline that I use in the classes, to try to track the ischia pointing, each one at each foot. Sometimes you catch a glimpse of the kind of relationship of that rocking that the ischia are doing, and the movement of the pelvis, as well, to support the action. And I have an idea that sometimes I can get them to work independently. I have a feeling that sometimes that's possible. Anyway, that's all internal spaces, which nobody else is privy to, and from which I'm making this improvisation happen.[@despain-2014-landscape p.112]


Kent De Spain: Time is, at times, personal, cultural, and universal and we can attend to it in those and other ways simply by shifting our awareness, but the most useful (and admittedly personal) definition I have created for it is as follows: Time is the somatic experience of change.[@despain-2014-landscape p.114]


Kent De Spain: We have all felt those moments in practice and in performance (doing or watching) when we felt "out" of time, not that time does not exist, but that the energy and momentum of the now so fills our senses that our awareness and expectations regarding past, present, and future become a singular pastpresentfuture that lingers on like an inhale that draws breath forever.[@despain-2014-landscape p.114]


Barbara Dilley: I think time is gloriously powerful as an instigator of the unseen realm. I like, more and more, to consider long amounts of time, to demand longer duration of events occurring so that different superficial levels can fall away through longer sequences, sequencing of time. And speed. What is speed? Is speed physically about space or is it about time? So the space/time issue. I love contemplating both of those, both space and time.[@despain-2014-landscape p.116]


Kent De Spain: By taking everyday movements and altering their rhythms, their speeds, their time harmonics, we can crack open the unconscious portion of the template process. We can become fully aware (as fully as we are capable) of things for the first time since we awkwardly struggled to learn them in the first place. And it is when we are "cracked open" in this way that we can begin to sense the presence of the extraordinary, hidden, as it has been all along, right there within the world of the ordinary.[@despain-2014-landscape p.116]


Barbara Dilley: I suppose [the question of forming] means, what does it mean to be an artist? And I've had mixed feelings about that because somehow being an artist separates me away from other people, so I don't really think it's helpful in the bigger picture. I love the Balinese phrase that "we don't have a name for art, we just do everything the best we can." So there's a quality of doing everything precisely and cleanly and thoroughly, finding harmony or balance.[@despain-2014-landscape p.123]


Nancy Stark Smith: I'm very interested in this hinge or this movement between being really unconscious of form, really following instinct and sensation in a formless kind of way, or engaging in form, a play of form on different levels, how they work together. It's very exciting sometimes to follow sensation without that much of an awareness of what it's making manifest in the space, and then being able to check it and go back and forth, and maybe add different levels of limitation or instruction, to make something that is more satisfying on certain levels. And that's another question of intention. I feel like it's almost just different parts of the brain, too, in terms of recognition and interaction and concept, and then aesthetics, which I almost don't even feel like I've gotten to yet, I'm so engaged in the process of this research and of bringing these components together. I know when I've been moved, and I call. them "glimpses" sometimes-whether it's in teaching or in experiencing my own improvisation—and I really feel like once there's enough glimpses I might know what the conditions are that create that more consistently. Now, if we have those instructions again, will that same thing happen? Do I like that thing happening? Do I like it as a teacher? Do I like it as a dancer? Do I like it as an artist? Do I like it as a human being? What would take it more in that direction next time? If I added this instruction, or took that one away, or added this kind of seed, or did this kind of practice on the side to fortify some other level of it, then maybe it would be stronger.[@despain-2014-landscape p.125]


Steve Paxton: I have a place in my mind in which a number of words like "art" are kept in a kind of deep freeze so they won't get out and bother me. I realized that every word was a little jolt of idea in my mind. I have flagellated myself over the idea of art, or artistic creation, or good and bad art. I have done all those flagellations and I was hoping to get beyond them even if I couldn't answer them, so I have them in deep freeze. And occasionally I bring them out and say, "Oh yes, this is relevant here." But basically I don't think about them.[@despain-2014-landscape p.127]


Lisa Nelson: Imagination is interesting to me, because I feel like that's the force that (long pause here) "entertains" my improvisation, makes my improvisation make something out of itself. I do see it as one of the senses, because I know that it can be developed like a sense can be, like vision or hearing. It's a matter of just becoming aware of it, of the signals that my imagination is constructing something and valuing it. Image is a very tricky place for me, because images somehow get very language dependent when we speak of them, and when they are used in dance.[@despain-2014-landscape p.130]


Kent De Spain: I don't know that any experienced improviser ever strays far from the sense that a large part of what occurs in moving is "out of my hands" as Zaporah puts it. Improvisation is much closer to surfing than it is to archery or billiards. You can have all the fine-tuned movement skills in the world, but you cannot "control" your actions in the same way because too much is changing in the moment. Like surfing, you are making cognitive decisions—reading the wave, the wind, and the undercurrent; factoring in direction and speed—but at the same time you are reacting to unexpected shifts in the powerful force that propels you forward in space/time. The stakes may not be as high (although, in Contact Improvisation, safety is often in question), but I think the balance of intellect and instinct is the same. The question is where you turn your focus. Ruth Zaporah wants to revel in the force of the wave and the wind in her hair. Simone Forti also feels the wind, but places more attention on the underlying physics.[@despain-2014-landscape p.138]


Kent De Spain: I cannot blame any improviser for not choosing to focus on cognition in moving. The conscious mind is ponderous when compared to the speed and clarity of instinctual reactions. But whenever we shift from a sensation-based, "I am doing," to the not-quite-so-sure, "What am I doing?" some level of analysis is required. The more I want to "know" about what is going on in the moment, the more I need my cognitive skills to help me understand and then apply that understanding to the map of the future. No wonder Barbara Dilley sees cognition as a fundamental resource for finding our way forward, in moving and in life.[@despain-2014-landscape p.141]


Steve Paxton: ... contrast, was the Cunningham company. And what are they doing, or what were we doing? I have always wondered because, there, we were almost not "selves." We were told things like, "just do the movement." That is so restrictive. What happens to the whole rest of the percent of the interior world of the dancer if you're not supposed to do anything other than the movement? How do you get that movement to happen without desire? Is that desire the right desire? Well, it must be okay because it's been checked out in rehearsal. But is it pure enough? Is somebody else desiring their movement better than I'm desiring my movement? Do I have base desires in mind? Am I trying to lift the leg out of vanity rather than out of choreographic precision. It's a minefield in there. I think many of these things take care of themselves really nicely without special conscious consideration if you have a kind of idea. I, for instance, expect to have emotions and I don't expect to share them. The point is not to share them. I can have them and they can show, but I don't make emotional scenarios to fulfill. Many of these things seem to be the starting points. Lisa calls it desire, which I think is a good overall catch term for it. You might call it sensing. You might call it emotion. Things do start somewhere.[@despain-2014-landscape p.146]

Kent De Spain:
Paxton's statement that "things do start somewhere" is a recognition that, at the very root of most behavior, including improvisational behavior, you find desire. "I want to go over there. I'm tired of this now. This feels good to me; I want to do this some more." Desire is tempered by many other factors—aesthetics, culture, physical limitations—but without desire the rest is just an empty shell in the shape of an improvisation. When desire is small-"Oh, I guess I'd rather go right than left right now"—you might not sense its true nature, but desire can be an emotion, and when it becomes intense enough, you will know that is true. Wanting and not wanting are emotional states, and playing with the intensity dials can really open the spigot for your creative juices. Desire and the other emotions provide motives for moving.[@despain-2014-landscape p.146]


Kent De Spain: While improvising, we tend to explore the elements of our moving as long as they hold interest or value. We push them, enhance them, to see what that brings. We combine them with other elements in the laboratory of our attention, then move on when it is "time" to do so. It is a practice similar in some ways to Buddhist meditation. We learn to let things go without regret, knowing that more things will arise. Emotions cling so close to the bone that it is often difficult to let them go (which may make us reticent to let them come in the first place). But if emotion is like space is like time is like movement, then we can bring them to bear when it is interesting or helpful, and let them go when they are in the way. You may choose to communicate those emotions or not but, as Paxton says, we should "expect to have emotions." Why not play with them?[@despain-2014-landscape p.147]


Ruth Zaporah: Well, it's interesting because it's like the dream world, in my work, which has to do with content. Certain memory does arise, certain images arise from the past, and I'm interested in them when they arise, but I'm interested in them as far as, number one, they've arrived right here, right now in the context of what's happening, so therefore they're not "that" (the past), they're "this," and I think the danger is when we really think they're "that." They're always "this." So a memory is a very present experience and we bring to it everything else that's in this present moment. So what I do is I don't honor its boundaries at all; it's just another thing that comes up, and I see where it goes.[@despain-2014-landscape p.152]


Nancy Stark Smith: One of the things I've heard myself say lately in these workshops, especially in the beginning when people are just warming up, I might frame that as arriving physically and arriving energetically, but I'm not giving them exercises to do. So I'll try to lay in a few possibilities so they at least have something, but also leave it open for people who work with their own bodies. So I say you have at least three major areas of resource when you are in this early phase and one of them is the sensations in your body right now that's telling you "oh, it would be nice to stretch like this" or "I need this" or "I want this." And another one is your memory or your history of things.. everything you've ever done and that you know how to do that could maybe meet your needs, or that you might want to do. And the third is the environment and the things that you're stimulated to do by what you hear, what you see, including what other people are doing. So that's available to you. That level of memory is there. 

There's one thing that we do sometimes in standing, doing the small dance, and considering the moment we were born and facing the direction of where we were born. I don't know that that's memory, that people actually remember, but it's creating a link between something before, somewhere else, and now, a kind of flow, a kind of movement between, but without using it necessarily directly.[@despain-2014-landscape p.154]


Steve Paxton: When I'm really on and when I'm having those fleeting seconds of body control, as opposed to—be it ever so humble—mental control, there's almost no memory, and it's as though my mind isn't stopping to take notes. My mind is somehow occupied on another level. So that gives me a lot of hope of getting away from the self that I use as my art material, and finding some new material. There's new stuff in there someplace if I can just get over myself. [And] to go back to time, no discussion of time would be relevant without it. You have to base the idea of awareness of time on the memory factor.[@despain-2014-landscape p.156]


Deborah Hay: And just enough change of time within the travel, stretching the time or shrinking the time, just enough so that the audience can't get too comfortable in the timing of it. And you are so aware of where you are each moment in the space that the audience sees it with you. And within the choreography are all of these things to notice while you're doing it so that you don't fall into a pitfall, so that the audience has a moment. And I'm always in the audience, I'm always projecting myself into the audience. How interested am I in looking at this woman flitting around on stage? What are the tricks I need to do in order to keep her attention or his attention. And it's also within me. How do I flit around stage and find it interesting for myself to do in the first place? Why enter alone on the stage, going from here to there, and around and ending up over there? How many times has this been done? Who's done it? What's the difference? That's a big amount of choreography. That's why I say my work isn't improvised. I know where my attention has to be in order to carry this stupid act out in the first place. It's so monumental, the level of attention that I have to pay to so much, that I have no time to improvise.[@despain-2014-landscape p.163]


Everyone knows what attention is. It is the taking possession by the mind, in clear and vivid form, of one out of what seem several simultaneously possible objects or trains of thought....It implies withdrawal from some things in order to deal effectively with others.
—William James, Principles of Psychology [@despain-2014-landscape p.167]


Kent De Spain: I typically use two terms for the ways we notice what is happening in the moment, two terms forming the ends of a spectrum: attention and awareness. Attention is an intentional focus on a specific "thing," or closely observing the relationship and interaction of more than one "thing." Awareness is a state of being open to stimuli, of being receptive to what comes your way. Attention is yang to the yin of awareness. Attention is a telephoto lens. Awareness is wide angle. Both are fundamentally important to success in improvising, and both seem to be rooted in one of our most fundamental survival skills: the ability to act with intention based on the relationship between sensory data and prior experience. A simple example: you hear a sound that signals danger and immediately move to hide. In this example you need to be open to sensory input (even when engaged in other actions) and then focus quickly on it to analyze what it is, what it means, and what you must do in response.[@despain-2014-landscape p.168]


Kent De Spain: Improvisation, especially in performance, can have a bit of that same fight-or-flight feel about it. In the pressure of the moment, a heightened attention allows you t o assess the situation, sort quickly through the options and resources, and continue to move with intention, all often faster than the speed of consciousness. That last thought is very important, because my experience of improvisational attention is that once you enter the state, things happen for you faster than you can think them. My consciousness rides along with the action, as opposed to directing it from a position of power. I consciously notice things, comment on things, suggest things, but my conscious mind is less "in charge" than in other parts of my life. My "mind" is interactional without being dictatorial, and that may be one of the very best things about movement improvisation.[@despain-2014-landscape p.168]


Kent De Spain: The process of attention has more than one function in improvisation. It can help us bring our skills and resources to bear in moving and choice-making, but it can also begin to bring the unacknowledged structures of our interior world to the edge of consciousness (where we can at least sense their shadowy presence, if not see them clearly). Like meditation, improvisation is a contemplative practice, a tool for self-discovery and self-awareness. And as with meditation, improvisation sometimes allows us to focus our attention i n the moment o n how we focus our attention in the moment, bringing us face to face with our limitations and capabilities and the ways we sometimes bob and weave with our conscious thoughts to avoid stillness and silence and the quiet places that scare us. It takes an effort of will to maintain awareness throughout an improvisation, and personal forgiveness when you cannot.[@despain-2014-landscape p.170]


Barbara Dilley: I feel, bringing it together with the contemplative and meditative trainings, the central interest of mine is that ability to actually pay attention and raise attention up and notice the patterns that erode attention, or recognizing when attention is present and alive, and noticing when I get triggered and therefore I drop out of attention. I think movement practices, embodied practices, are an incredible personal laboratory for working with attention and developing a stronger sense of presence in that way, and therefore being able to be open to mystery. So attention is an essential training, to train in developing attention, in nurturing it and letting it rise and become larger and fuller, and knowing how to offset the obstacles to that attention and then that leaves one open to mystery, or the unexpected, or the not known, or the voice from the open dimension.[@despain-2014-landscape p.171]






---
_reference:_ De Spain, K. (2014) _Landscape of the Now: A Topography of Movement Improvisation_. Oxford New York: Oxford University Press

Have PDF only of these highlights.