---
aliases: []
tags: []
author: "Roman Krznaric"
year: "2021"
title: "The good ancestor: how to think long term in a short-term world"
type: "literature"
status: "in-progress"
updated: "2022-01-06"
---

#  Krznaric - The Good Ancestor

## Blurb

> The most important question we must ask ourselves is, "Are we being good ancestors?" So said Jonas Salk, who developed the polio vaccine in 1953 but refused to patent it--forgoing profit so that more lives could be saved. Salk's radical generosity to future generations should inspire us. But when leading philosopher Roman Krznaric examines society today, he sees just the opposite: Our short term, exploitative mindsets have "colonized the future." Businesses eschew civic responsibility for immediate gains, politicians throw their support behind whatever will win the next election, and we all struggle to focus our attention beyond the next alert from our phones. The result? An inexcusable chasm between the haves and have-nots--and mounting existential threats--have brought our species to the precipice of disaster. Yet Krznaric sees reason to hope. Yes, the urgent struggle for intergenerational justice calls for hugely ambitious solutions, from rewiring our growth-at-all-costs economy to giving voters of future generations a voice in our democracies. But at the heart of all these changes is one we can enact within ourselves: We must trade shortsightedness for long-term thinking. In The Good Ancestor, Krznaric reveals six practical ways we can retrain our brains to think of the long view, including Deep-Time Humility (recognizing our lives as a cosmic eyeblink) and Cathedral Thinking (starting projects that will take more than one lifetime to complete). His aim is to inspire more "time rebels" like Greta Thunberg--to shift our allegiance from this generation to all humanity--in short, to save our planet and our future.

## Literature notes

> Rather than thinking on a scale of seconds, days, and months, we should extend our time horizons to encompass decades, centuries, and millennia. [p.4]

> the [4] great irony of our time,” writes the anthropologist Mary Catherine Bateson, “is that even as we are living longer, we are thinking shorter.”2 This is the age of the tyranny of the now.[pp.4-5]

> The moment has come, especially for those living in wealthy nations, to recognize a disturbing truth: that we have colonized the future. We treat the future like a distant colonial outpost devoid of people, where we can freely dump ecological degradation, technological risk, and nuclear waste, and which we can plunder as we please. When Britain colonized Australia in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, it drew on a legal doctrine now known as terra nullius—“nobody’s land”—to justify its conquest and treat the indigenous population as if they didn’t exist or have any claims on the land.8  Today our societal attitude is one of tempus nullius: The future is seen as “nobody’s time,” an unclaimed territory that is similarly devoid of inhabitants. Like the distant realms of empire, it is ours for the taking. Just as indigenous Australians still struggle against the legacy of terra nullius, so too there is a struggle to be had against the doctrine of tempus nullius.[p.7]

> Pope Francis has proclaimed that “intergenerational solidarity is not optional, but a basic question of justice.”11 [p.8]

> Is there an ideal time horizon to which we should aspire in the tug-of-war against short-termism? This book proposes a hundred years as a minimum threshold for long-term thinking. This is the current length of a long human lifespan, taking us beyond the ego [p.15] boundary of our own mortality so we begin to imagine futures that we can influence yet not participate in ourselves.17 It extends much further than the maximum five- or ten-year outlook found in corporations, toward the time horizon of actions like planting an oak tree, which will mature long after we have gone.[pp.14-15]

> An essay by Nathaniel Rich about our failure to act on the climate crisis illustrates this view. “Human beings,” he writes, “whether in global organizations, democracies, industries, political parties or as individuals, are incapable of sacrificing present convenience to fore-stall a penalty imposed on future generations.”1[p.18]

1.  <https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2018/08/01/magazine/climate-change-losing-earth.html>. For a searing rebuke of Rich’s view by 
Naomi Klein, see <https://theintercept.com/2018/08/03/climate-change-new-york-times-magazine>.

>  a new field of research known as prospective psychology, which argues that what makes humans unique is our ability to think about, or “prospect,” the future. To borrow a term from psychologist Martin Seligman, we are Homo prospectus, a species “guided by imagining alternatives stretching into the future.”8 [22]

> An essential starting point is to develop a sense of deep-time humility, where we grasp the insignificance of our own transitory existence in relation to the vast time frame of cosmic history, free-ing our minds to look both far into the past and beyond our lifetimes into a distant future. We must accept the reality that our personal stories from birth to death, and all the achievements and tragedies of human civilization, will barely register in the annals of cosmological time.[39]

> Through novels such as The Time Machine (1895), in which a Victorian gentleman scientist sends himself forward to the year 802,701—Wells opened Western culture to long-term thinking, or what he referred to as “an ever-expanding Now.”12 [46]

> In 2015, Jonathon Keats installed a deep-time camera in Tempe, Arizona, which is taking a 1,000-year-long exposure of the city’s skyline that will finally be exhibited in 3015. The artist Martin Kunze’s Memory of Mankind project, which aims to preserve “endangered memories,” is depositing 1,000 of the most important books of humankind in an Austrian salt mine, to be stored on ceramic micro-film tablets for a million years.[48]

> Perhaps the most thought-provoking deep-time artwork of them all is The Clock of the Long Now, also known as the 10,000 Year Clock. A project of the Long Now Foundation, its purpose is to create a new mythology of time that challenges the pathologically short attention span of the modern world. As one of its inventors, Stewart Brand, puts it, “How do we make long-term thinking automatic and common instead of difficult and rare? How do we make the taking of long-term responsibility inevitable? The device is a Clock, very big and very slow.”14 The clock, which is designed to stay accurate for ten millennia, will be 200 feet tall, and is currently being built inside a remote limestone mountain in the Texas desert, although its complex engineering means it still may be more than a decade until it is completed. Visitors will have to endure a tough full-day hike to reach its inner workings. Once there, they will be greeted by the chime of ten bells, created by the musician Brian Eno, which will ring in a unique sequence each day for the 10,000 years—3,652,500 days—of the clock’s lifetime.15[48]

> Most depictions of deep time are historical: They begin in the distant past and bring us up to the present and the age of Homosapiens. In doing so, there is a danger that humankind comes across almost as the zenith of the evolutionary process—an idea that may do little to encourage a sense of humility among our species. That is why we also need visions of deep time that explicitly look forward as well as back, focusing just as much on the epochs to come. This is an approach often found among cosmologists, such as the British astrophysicist Martin Rees:
>> I’d like to widen people’s awareness of the tremendous timespan lying ahead—for our planet, and for life itself. Most educated people are aware that we’re the outcome of nearly four billion years of Darwinian selection, but many tend to think that humans are somehow the culmination. Our sun, however, is less than halfway through its lifespan. It will not be humans who watch the sun’s demise, six billion years from now. Any creatures that then exist will be as different from us as we are from bacteria or amoebae. Our concern with Earth’s future is, understandably, focused upon the next 100 years at most—the lifetimes of our children and grandchildren. But awareness of this longer time horizon, and the immense potential that human actions this century could foreclose, offers an extra motive for proper steward-ship of this planet.18 [50]

> This message goes to the heart of the deep-time perspective. On the one hand, it serves to extend our imaginations from a short now to a longer now, where Homo sapiens are here for little more than an eye-blink of cosmic time. We are merely bit players appearing on stage for the briefest moment in a story stretching over eons. On the other hand, it is a warning about our destructive potential: In an incredibly short period of time we have endangered a world that took billions of years to evolve. We are just a tiny link in the great chain of living organisms, so who are we to put it all in jeopardy with our ecological blindness and deadly technologies? Don’t we have an obligation, a responsibility, to our planetary future and the generations of humans and other species to come? [51]

> Yet if we truly wish to become good ancestors, we need to expand our conception of legacy and think of it not just as a route to personal glory or as a bequest for our offspring, but as a practice of everyday life that benefits all future people. We can think of this as a transcendent “legacy mindset,” where we aim to be remembered by the generations who we will never know, the universal strangers of the future. We can cultivate this form of long-term thinking through three approaches: the death nudge, intergenerational gifts, and the wisdom of whakapapa.[58]

> While it is clear that we should draw on the power of the death nudge, the lab experiments of behavioral psychologists can seem far removed from the realities of everyday life. For instance, they tend to frame leaving a legacy as an end-of-life financial decision, whereas it could equally involve planting a tree, switching to a plant-based diet, or taking part in a street protest to protect the health care system.
> To help think through such possibilities, it is worth giving yourself a death nudge with a penetrating question about the legacies we leave, which was first asked by the long-term thinker Stewart Brand: What might our descendants wish we had done better for them?9 [61]

> This is evident in the time-bending Māori proverb, Kia whakatōmuri te haere whakamua: “I walk backwards into the future with my eyes fixed on my past.” The Māori worldview is based on a liquid sense of time that dissolves yesterday, today and tomorrow into one another, and which requires a respect for the traditions and beliefs of previous generations while also being mindful of those who are yet to come. Everyone is in the room: the dead, the living and the unborn. “We are all grandchildren and we are all ancestors,” says Māori lawyer and children’s rights campaigner Julia Whaipooti. “Personally I’m driven by our mokopuna (‘future generations’) to make the world a better place than when we found it.”14 [65]

> The best-known expression of such thinking is the Māori concept of whakapapa (“genealogy”), which describes a continuous lifeline that connects an individual to the past, present, and future.15 In traditional Māori culture, a person’s whakapapa or ancestral lineage can be represented in a ta moko, a facial or body tattoo. Nanaia Mahuta, the first female politician to wear a facial ta moko in the New Zealand parliament, describes it a marker of “who I am, where I come from and the contribution I want to continue to make.”16 [65]

> With imagination, however, we can find ways of connecting with the power of whakapapa. The most effective means I have ever encountered for doing so was through taking part in an immersive workshop on legacy thinking, part of a weekend convened by the Long Time Project. The workshop, which was called Human Layers, was created by cultural activists Ella Saltmarshe and Hannah Smith, and inspired by the deep ecologist Joanna Macy. Although it is best experienced in the company of others, it is possible to experience by yourself. [66]

> Discounting is an iconic expression of the colonizationof the future, treating it as virtually empty of inhabitants.[75]

> While discounting may first appear to be a neutral and technocratic exercise, as the Nobel Prize–winning economist Amartya Sen points out, it inevitably involves a value judgment and should be “a matter for public deliberation.”7 The inventor of discounting, Frank Ramsey, went a step further and declared in 1928 that discounting the welfare of future generations was “ethically indefensible and arises merely from the weakness of the imagination.”8 This is not to say that discounting should have no place whatsoever in project appraisal, just that it may not be appropriate to use when assessing environmental projects with very long-term impacts like a tidal energy scheme, or in cases where there is the chance of irreversible and catastrophic risks that no promise of economic growth can make up for. But in order to justify putting discounting to one side, we also need to make the positive case for equality between the generations. Why exactly should we care so much about people from the future? [77]

> This all began to change in 1987, when the UN’s World Commission on Environment and Development published Our Common Future (known as the Brundt-land Report), which famously defined sustainable development as “development that meets the needs of the present without compro-mising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.”10 [78]
- meeting our needs and needs of others 

> The Arrow concerns the extent to which we are responsible for the future consequences of our actions. One of its best-known formulations appears in the writing of philosopher Derek Parfit:
> >Remoteness in time has, in itself, no more significance than remoteness in space. Suppose that I shoot some arrow into a distant wood, where it wounds some person. If I should have known that there might be someone in this wood, I am guilty of gross negligence. Because this person is far away, I cannot identify the person whom I harm. But this is no excuse. Nor is it any excuse that this person is far away. We should make the same claims about effects on people who are temporally remote.18 [81]
- another body under pressure 
- could be stewardship of other (future) bodies

> Some critics counter that in the coming millennia there may not even be humans like us to stand on the other side of the scales. Homo sapiens could morph into a cyborg race with artificially enhanced intelligence and manufactured organs that allow them to live centuries rather than decades, and they may have a completely different set of values and concept of well-being. How can we know what might even matter to them, or whether we would grant them the same moral standing as ourselves? But assuming that there will still be some Homo sapiens around, or beings who resemble us in significant ways that we recognize—feeling pain, fearing death, falling in love, wanting families, and searching for purpose—it would be an act of colossal moral failure to disregard their welfare. Doing so would be to display an unashamedly colonial attitude to the future, treating it as a distant land empty of inhabitants that we are free to plunder with impunity. [82]

> Suzuki recognizes that seeing humans as interdependent with the living world lies at the heart of the seventh-generation principle. The environment is not something “out there”; as he puts it, “we are the environment.” We are connected to the landscape, just as we are to future generations, through the air we breathe, the water we drink, and the soil in which we grow our food.
> The oxygen we breathe in, for instance, circulates in our blood-stream and around half remains in our lungs, so there is no clear line separating where the air ends and we begin. When we exhale, our breath mixes with the air and is taken in by other people, birds, mammals, and reptiles. “If I am air and you are air, then I am you,” writes Suzuki. But the atoms in the air also persist through time. According to one study, there are 3 x 1019 (three followed by nineteen zeros) argon atoms in a breath of air. These quintillions of atoms are continually being blown around the planet, so wherever you are, you will breathe in around 15 argon atoms that you breathed in a year earlier. And that’s not all. Each breath we take contains argon atoms that were probably once inhaled by Cleopatra and Gautama Buddha, and will be breathed in by our descendants seven generations from today. “Air,” says Suzuki, plays an essential role “linking all life in a single matrix, and joining past, present and future in a single flowing entity.”32 [88]

> When we build, let us think that we build forever.
> Let it not be for the present delight, nor for present use alone; let it be such a work as our descendants will thank us for.
—John Ruskin1 [92]


> Ise Jingū, Japan
> A Shinto shrine that has been torn down and rebuilt to exactly the same design every 20 years since 690 CE. A building forever new and forever ancient. [96]

>  This is exactly where the London sewers were exemplary. By making the tunnels double the size needed at the time, Bazalge-tte designed long-term adaptability into the system, just as his use of the finest building materials gave the sewers enough resilience to survive over a century of constant wear and tear. Of course, we can learn about resilience not just from cases like the Victorian sewers, but from natural phenomena such as a delicate spider web that manages to survive a storm or the way sweating and shivering help regulate human body temperature.25 [111]
- resilience of body under pressure
- Flexibility, absorbing strain, lightness 

> As Milton Friedman put it, while a crisis provides the opportunity for change, “when that crisis occurs, the actions that are taken depend on the ideas that are lying around.”28 The tragedy of the 2008 financial crisis was that there was no obvious alternative economic vision on offer. It was an opportunity to completely recast the global financial system, and yet governments ended up bailing out the banks and propping up the obsolete economic structures that created the crisis in the first place. It is a mistake that should not be repeated; alternative models need to be at the ready. That is why it is so crucial to begin seeding the values and practices of long-term thinking in the here and now. [114]

> In Epoch A there were few limits on growth, resource use, and available energy. It was a period characterized by high levels of material consumption, a largely individualistic culture and a dominance of short-range thinking. But in Salk’s view, with a global population approaching ten times its earlier historic level, society was moving into Epoch B, where we will only be able to survive by adopting a new set of values and institutions based on sustainable resource use, an awareness of limits, higher levels of social cooperation, and much longer-range thinking. He was convinced that to be good ancestors we must recognize that we are heading toward the top of the sigmoid curve and thus need to adopt a mindset fit for Epoch B, rather than clutch on to the outdated attitudes and practices of Epoch A. If we failed to make this transition, human civilization would be heading for a calamitous breakdown.15 [123]

> All three pathways are likely to coexist in a messy amalgam as we traverse the coming decades: There will be cities and organizations that are engaged in Transformation alongside nations pursuing Reform and communities facing the impact of Breakdown. We confront a choice about the civilizational pathway we want to follow, whether acting in our personal lives, communities, workplaces, or as citizens. The longer we wait to jump onto the path of Transformation, the greater the amount of suffering humanity will have to endure as our societies slide inexorably down the S-curve. A good ancestor recognizes a dying system when they see one, and rather than trying to pass on their own dysfunctional civilization to the next generation, they take part in the historic act of seeding a new civilization that can grow in its place and maintain the conditions conducive to life into the long future. [136]

> Viktor Frankl, Auschwitz survivor and founder of existential psychotherapy, believed that we find meaning by dedicating ourselves to what he called a “concrete assignment,” a future project or ideal that transcends the self.1 [138]

- 5 transcendent goals for humankind:

> One-planet thriving: Meet the needs of all current and future people within the means of a flourishing planet

- eco somatics ?

>  While climatic changes may have led to the disappearance of some species, there is now a widespread consensus that humans played a major role by carrying out an ecological blitzkrieg. As historian Ronald Wright notes, “a bad smell of extinction follows Homo sapiens around the world.” Paleontologist Tim Flannery puts it even more starkly, describing our rapacious species as “the future eaters.”6 [141]

> In the second half of the twentieth century, industrial capitalism was joined by consumer capitalism, which focused less on the exploitation of labor and more on the manufacture of desire—getting people to buy things they didn’t really need, from second cars to napkin rings. This fostered a short-term culture of instant consumer gratification that tapped into our marshmallow brains and is evident in everything from the rise of the fast-food industry to today’s expectation of same-day delivery of online shopping. It also displayed a reckless attitude toward long-term consequences: So long as firms achieved their immediate financial goals, it didn’t matter if this polluted the air, deforested the landscape, poisoned rivers, created nicotine and sugar addictions, or plunged households into long-term debt. [142]

> But it has now become too difficult to ignore the collateral damage. Earth system scientists have a name for it: the Great Acceleration. Especially since the 1950s, rising GDP, car ownership, and other indicators of material progress have been accompanied by rapidly increasing levels of carbon dioxide, species extinction, and other forms of ecological degradation (see above).10 All those steeply rising curves have become an iconic image of the dangers inherent in the pursuit of progress. [144]

> So what organisms have learned to do is to take care of the place that’s going to take care of their offspring. Life has learned to create conditions conducive to life. That’s really the magic heart of it. And that’s also the design brief for us right now. We have to learn how to do that.35 -- Janine Benyus [157]

> This passage offers a unique insight into long-term thinking: that it can be pursued by stepping outside the realm of time itself, and that it is about caring for place as much as rethinking time. The best way for any species—including our own—to ensure its longevity is to fully adapt to and preserve the ecosystem in which it is embedded. [157]

> The transcendent goal of one-planet thriving calls on us to recognize our symbiotic relationship with the planetary whole and to respect its natural boundaries and capacities. It sets our sights on place rather than time as the key to ensuring the longevity of our species. One-planet thriving stands apart from the other forms of telos described earlier, through its elemental concern with safe-guarding the possibility of life itself, generation after generation, drawing on nearly four billion years of evolutionary learning and wisdom. It is about protecting “base camp Earth” and ensuring a viable future for our descendants on the one and only planet that has evolved to sustain them. And that is why it is the long-term goal that can best guide us along the pathway of the good ancestor. [159]

> “The origin of civil government,” wrote David Hume in 1739, is that “men are not able radically to cure, either in themselves or others, that narrowness of soul, which makes them prefer the present to the remote.”1 The Scottish philosopher was convinced that the institutions of government, such as elected representatives and parliamentary debates, were needed to temper our impulsive and selfish desires and foster society’s long-term interests and welfare.
> If only. [164]

> We need a system where politicians are drawn from a hat, the same way we set up our juries. People should be charged to serve for six years—they have no political party, their only job is to govern to the best of their ability. There’s no chance in hell of that ever happening, but when you think about it that’s the only system that would work.31 [180] -- David Suzuki

>  Thirdly, citizens’ assemblies are an exercise in “slow thinking,” allowing participants the time and space to learn about and reflect on long-term issues facing society. Such factors, points out political scientist Graham Smith, help explain why citizens’ assemblies “outperform more traditional democratic institutions in orientating participants to consider long-term implications.”34 [181]
