---
aliases: 
tags:
  - losing-self
type: literature
readwise: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s12671-018-0995-z
---

# Christian U. Krägeloh - Phenomenological Research Fails to Capture the Experience of Nondual Awareness

_Abstract:_ Phenomenological research is unable to capture the experience of nondual awareness, according to this article. Mindfulness-based interventions have been popularized in Western psychology, but some traditional elements of mindfulness have been removed. The secularization of mindfulness has generated debate about its ethics and insight, the role of which is more central to Buddhism. Phenomenology, which focuses on the co-generated essence and structure of experience, as opposed to raw, pre-reflective experience, cannot capture the experience of nondual awareness.

> One of the most commonly cited definitions in the psychological literature has been provided by Kabat-Zinn (1994): “paying attention in a particular way: on purpose, in the present moment, and non-judgmentally” (p. 4). More detail and a wider range of aspects has been given by Bishop et al. (2004), who “see mindfulness as a process of regulating attention in order to bring a quality of nonelaborative awareness to current experience and a quality of relating to one’s experience within an orientation of curiosity, experiential openness, and acceptance. We further see mindfulness as a process of gaining *insight* into the nature of one’s mind and the adoption of a de-centered perspective…on thoughts and feelings so that they can be experienced in terms of their subjectivity (versus their necessary validity) and transient nature (versus their permanence)” (p.234). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakpj67tb485ea2ym5bk0pmj)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.15]


> Using the expression *McMindfulness*, Purser and Loy (2013) lamented the trend of commercialization of mindfulness training for purposes that are increasingly remote from the original liberative and transformative purposes. Similar arguments have been made by others (e.g., Brazier 2013) that Buddhist mindfulness is not primarily palliative and focused on reduction of distress but that it is instead related to realizing wider meaning and purpose. Qualitative data from senior ordained Buddhists also revealed that Buddhism views mindfulness practice as more purposeful and related to one’s life trajectory in the search for meaning (Feng et al. 2018). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakq8m58e3aefpgsvnzf4zec)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.16]


> As the present discussion will illustrate, there are substantial parallels between mindfulness practice and the process of phenomenological inquiry. However, the focus of the phenomenological research process on *essences* and thus objectifications and abstractions of experience as opposed to raw, pre-reflective experience renders this approach irrelevant for the exploration of nondual awareness. Firstly, the approach by Depraz et al. (2003) will be outlined as an example of a comprehensive method of phenomenological inquiry into mindfulness and nondual awareness. This will be followed by a section that compares the qualities developed in this phenomenological inquiry with those in mindfulness practice. Lastly, the discussion will outline how the concept of experience is understood differently in the Buddhist philosophy of emptiness and nonduality, where it may even be assigned an ontological role that defies any reified description and discourse. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakracpc9eym77b7agrep1hv)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.16]



> What Depraz et al. (2003) described as the *basic cycle* includes the *epoché* and *intuitive evidence*. The original meaning of epoché in Greek philosophy was to refrain from movement or to suspend judgment. When applying this concept to phenomenology, Edmund Husserl “retains the move of interrupting the flow of our current thinking or active attitude: it is a willful act which puts aside our belief and prejudices and refuses to endow the real world with an unexamined truth; however, contrary to the sceptical attitude of radical refusal of any truth, Husserl proposes an attitude of suspension of the truth until an absolute certainty (what he calls apodicticity) can be found” (Depraz et al. 2003), p. 25). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakrhrzc3swjk3dea1qc807n)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.17]


> While continued practice of the basic cycle of suspension, redirection, and letting go leads to refinement of the reflective act, the experience has still not been communicated or validated. For that, intuitive evidence is required. Depraz et al. (2003) described some of the history of the term intuition in philosophy and psychology, although they do state that their primary goal is to provide a procedural description of the act as opposed to an inquiry into a theory of intuition. For that purpose, the authors defined the intuitive act as “a form of becoming aware that is both *non-mediated and passive*” (p. 48). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakrnbsz4yefkzrv3mwkkqkp)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.18]

> Conducting phenomenological research, or qualitative research more generally, is known to have strong parallels with the nature of the therapeutic process, which requires the clinician to be patient, curious, empathetic, respectful, self-aware, and nonjudgmental (Thorpe 2013). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haks7jtmmpd56fmeh44n145y)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.19]

> A more real-time approach has been offered through somatic phenomenology, defined as “a state-specific approach to the study of body-located sensate markers of psychological events within the lived experience of the body” (Hartelius 2015); p. 1274). While this approach provides a novel way to investigating attentional aspects of mindfulness, it is primarily concerned with the relationship between so-called phenomenal markers and somatic markers such as those identified through neurological measures. To assess the *quality* of the lived experience of mindfulness, the only methods available continue to be those that utilize eidetic variation and thus rely on discourse that is temporally removed from the experience. This includes modernized forms of introspection (Bitbol and Petitmengin 2013), which, similar to the approach by Depraz et al. (2003), rely on re-enacted experience rather than raw experience. Since the pre-reflective aspects of mindfulness and nondual awareness involve transcending the limitations imposed through distinctions and categories of language, the question arises to what extent the abovementioned techniques may be appropriate to serve as tools of inquiry into nondual awareness. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haks9zgd2r48c5cvndxt098f)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological pp.19-20]

> The core insight to be developed is that of true emptiness—the negation of the contrast between being and nonbeing. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haksjyvsrtcwqxtey5v7xgpq)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.20]

> However, understanding is not complete if emptiness is still viewed dualistically by contrasting it with form or when nonbeing is opposed to being. To arrive at an understanding of *true* emptiness that is not just another element in a plane of elements that can be named, a second negation is required, namely that of the differentiation between being and nonbeing (Abe 1975). This means that the distinction between emptiness and form, nonbeing and being, is transcended, and emptiness itself is empty. In true emptiness, being and nonbeing are thus paradoxically identical. True emptiness is not a state, and may instead be described as a dynamic activity of *emptying* affirmation and negation (Abe 1975). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haksnp82a2g2s1qm4p4zah07)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.20]

> The difficulty in communicating the present topic is the inevitable contradiction when discussing nonduality through a written medium or any other language-based manner. If nondual awareness is defined as a state such as one experienced during meditation, one does not need to engage with the issue of the limitations of language as one would have placed nonduality solely within a pre-linguistic plane. Dunne (2011), for example, described the nondual meditative state as one “in which the meditator experiences consciousness in its true form as utterly devoid of subject–object structuring” (p. 74). In this case, nondual awareness would appear as a state of concentration or mental silence with no self-referential cognitions, and this has been investigated under laboratory conditions such as using electroencephalography (EEG) with meditating participants (Berman and Stevens 2015). Such an approach of studying nondual awareness would also be consistent with the conceptualization of mindfulness as *bare attention* (Bodhi 2011); Krägeloh 2016) or *choiceless awareness* (Watt 2017), but it would be applicable only to very specific situations and would not be about the experience of nonduality in everyday-life interactions. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haksryzd1wn2kcb15cshwpxp)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.20]

> Other interpretations of nondual awareness apply its role in everyday consciousness where engagement with language and discriminations does take place. Consistent with so-called innateist Buddhist ideas that enlightenment is inherent in everybody but is hindered by the confusion and obstruction of additional thoughts (Dunne 2011), nondual awareness has also been understood as already occurring in everyone. From that perspective, nondual awareness does not involve the development of a new capacity of awareness but the use of techniques to suspend dualistic thought patterns (Dunne 2015). As opposed to meditative situations only, this type of nondual awareness may thus be described as a process of monitoring one’s engagement in the world that requires differentiation of subject and object. Nondual awareness is when one’s original *true* mind operates in the background while one’s working mind engages in the necessary dualistic discriminations in the foreground (Zhu 2005). To what extent such monitoring is continuous and even detectable through brain imaging remains to be explored. It is also unclear to what extent this background mental activity provides a stimulus for inhibition of certain cognitions or provides regular reminders to maintain certain perceptive perspectives. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakstnhg1hkh7g5rt6ts46bd)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological pp.20-21]

> All this practice is informed by continual questioning and reflective inquiry to develop wisdom and insight. As the elimination of clinging is a central theme in Buddhism, nondual awareness also ultimately relates back to nonattachment. A freely functioning mind without distortions and added thoughts and desires is also described as *no thought* (無念) in East Asian Buddhism (Allen 2010). Won Buddhism refers to this concept more specifically as *application of no thought* (Korean: *eung yong mu nyeom*응용무념, 應用無念) according to which one is not to engage in idle or wanton thoughts after having rendered a favor to other people (Chung 2003). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haksym30gyncdp9dbw4nb1e7)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.21]

> Any discourse about nondual awareness inevitably relates back to questions about self, the subject, or *who* is having the experience. The idea of the absence of a self in the most basic and raw direct experience is not only found in Eastern thinking but also in Western philosophy (Feenberg and Arisaka 1990); Natsoulas 1998). However, where Western philosophy and psychology generally differ from East Asian Buddhist thought is in the way in which they conceptualize or discuss experience. Expressed as *phenomenal objects* (Natsoulas 1994) or *reference experience* (Depraz et al. 2003), the tendency is for experience to remain reified and still not truly empty in the Buddhist sense. Comparisons are certainly more complex and open to interpretation, as the phenomenologist Edmund Husserl did refer to pre-reflective givenness (Feenberg and Arisaka 1990) and generally did stress that phenomena are not phenomenal *objects* (Natsoulas 1994). Relevant here is also the idea of ontological experience or the view of phenomenology as the experience of the projection of ontology (Wells 2014). The ontological primacy of experience has also been verbalized to some extent by Martin Heidegger who could thus be viewed has having ontologized the thinking of his teacher Husserl (Feenberg and Arisaka 1990). Even though Heidegger’s philosophy dealt explicitly with the *nothing*, there is debate to what extent nonbeing still remains understood as the opposite of being and not in the Buddhist sense of absence of differentiation between being and nonbeing (Krummel 2017; Wells 2014). Nevertheless, the question of nonbeing and emptiness is much more entrenched in Eastern than in Western thought. While one can certainly find evidence in the phenomenological literature hinting at understanding similar to that of Buddhist emptiness (see, for example, Zahavi 2003), it is generally not consistently expressed in that way and such ideas hardly affect commonly practiced qualitative research (Finlay 1999), which is often about reified experience such as when “verbalizing the concretely engaged reflecting act” (Depraz et al. 2003), p. 78). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakt3a8p5mnd56wse96r40r2)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.21]

> A philosophical approach that dealt extensively with the issues of experience and emptiness is that by Kitarō Nishida. Influenced by the work of William James (Friedl 2001), Nishida defined pure experience (Japanese: *junsui keiken* 純粋経験) right at the beginning of his early work *Inquiry into the good* as “the state of experience just as it is without the least addition of deliberative discrimination. The moment of seeing a color or hearing a sound, for example, is prior not only to the thought that the color or sound is the activity of an external object or that one is sensing it, but also to the judgment of what the color or sound might be. In this regard, pure experience is identical with direct experience. When one directly experiences one’s own state of consciousness, there is not yet a subject or an object, and knowing and its object are completely unified” (Nishida 1911/1990), p. 3). As Feenberg and Arisaka (1990) discuss, this definition needs to be interpreted as an ontological principle rather than a concrete mental state. Nishida’s philosophy is grounded in the Buddhist principle of absolute or true emptiness, where pure experience precedes the distinction between subject and object. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktc81dfv6y2fyht51am5fz)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.21]

> Nishida’s definition of pure experience is consistent with the abovementioned innateist view of nondual awareness. Pure experience precedes any subject-object distinction, which means that the self is also an experience: “Over time I came to realize that it is not that experience exists because there is an individual, but that the individual exists because there is experience. I thus arrived at the idea that experience is more fundamental than individual differences, and in this way I was able to avoid solipsism” (Nishida 1911/1990), p. xxx). Later, Nishida preferred to use the term acting intuition (Japanese: *kōiteki chokkan* 行為的直観) instead of pure experience (Kopf 2005), but a more detailed discussion of the philosophy of Nishida is beyond the scope of the present paper. Figure [1] serves as an illustration of the idea that the self, which has an experience (Experience 2), emerges out of more fundamental pure experience beyond subject-object distinction (Experience 1). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktcpsn4hc9e6r28vk857dd)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological pp.21-22]

> While thought is also experience, the more fundamental background experience is richer than the judgments and abstractions that occur through language (Dilworth 1969). The tendency to reify experience in research that utilizes phenomenological reduction means that this approach can never be a tool to capture nonbeing, as the inconceivable and ineffable will evade us the very moment we try to grasp it (Buri and Oliver 1992). Because subject-object distinction includes location, pure experience cannot be placed into an individual consciousness (Feenberg and Arisaka 1990). Individuals therefore do not *have* an experience, but it is experiential flow that creates individuals. It is within this flow that location and individuality is then created. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktfm42d5xkyee0frn42n1p)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.22]

- this is brilliant
- non-graspable
- do not have an experience but we are created by experiential flow.

> According to the phenomenological approach, the process of eidetic variation is assumed to produce a re-enacting of experience, while according to Buddhist philosophy re-enactment or approximation to reference experience only creates additional experience. Experience does not have any structure or essence that needs to be described or explored since structure and essence is itself an experience. According to Zen Buddhism, experience cannot be captured through rational analysis but it remains what it is—simply experience. The conversations of the interviewee and facilitator during eidetic variation are certainly also experience. However, these cannot replace, copy, or re-enact an experience, as this would imply a dualistic view of experience that is discrete and locatable in time and space. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktkv1agvezbgmsbya6yff1)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.22]

> The production of discourse that claims to represent the essence of experience is not unlike the postulation of latent psychological desires and mentalisms. While there may be a certain therapeutic utility here, these latent constructs do not replace actual experience. Even though there is a role of mindfulness practice in the process of conducting qualitative research, qualitative researchers need to ask themselves very critically to what extent their research activities serve the purpose of providing personal benefits from reflective and mindful practice or to what extent the activity of postulating essences through discourse truly results in additional useful knowledge. The present paper may hopefully provide a stimulus (a) for qualitative research methodology to develop further and (b) for qualitative research to position itself more clearly in terms of its potential role in furthering our understanding of mindfulness and nondual awareness. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktrd911f3bv9yzhwjqzhep)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.22]

> Pure experience or acting intuition is fundamental to all experience and is therefore always happening—this is the innateist view of an inherent Buddha nature. From the point of view of absolute nothingness, according to which there is no duality between being and nonbeing, the ordinary mind does not change with enlightenment. There is no special place to apply any effort (Kozyra 2007), and the only remaining way to describe the nondual mind is from the perspective of conventional logic (the only perspective that linguistic description can take). Nondual awareness may then be practically equivalent to nonattachment, as “[t]o become free from the objectivization of thinking consciousness is equivalent to nonattachment to things” (Buri and Oliver 1992), p. 86). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktvqj3exadts18ygd4b9h6)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological pp.22-23]

> Another technique is to collect contextual data about lived experience such as through ecological momentary assessment, which does not rely on retrospective accounts and is thus less vulnerable to recall bias (Vartanian et al. 2014). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktxfb9wv22wax6zk6ex8wy)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.23]

> The title of this piece that phenomenological research fails to capture the experience of nondual awareness is not meant as a special charge against phenomenological inquiry. After all, the main argument forwarded here is that *nothing captures experience*. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktyzpn9tm2n58gqq14fxvf)) [@krageloh-2019-phenomenological p.23]


### references from this article to look up: 

- Depraz, N., Varela, F. J., & Vermersch, P. (Eds.). (2003). *On becoming aware: a pragmatics of experiencing*. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company. ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01hakr2ae51f0z8kvm588ypzp6))
- Hartelius, G. (2015). Body maps of attention: phenomenal markers for two varieties of mindfulness. *Mindfulness, 6*(6), 1271–1281. [https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-015-0391-x](https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671-015-0391-x). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haksep3wa5y89n3dy67me7sa))
- Vartanian, L. R., Pinkus, R. T., & Smyth, J. M. (2014). The phenomenology of weight stigma in everyday life. *Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science, 3*(3), 196–202. [https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2014.01.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2014.01.003). ([View Highlight](https://read.readwise.io/read/01haktyejy2mtyd4axmejzya8y))

