---
aliases: []
tags: []
author: "Angela McRobbie"
year: "2016"
title: "Be creative: making a living in the new culture industries"
type: "literature"
current-status: "in-process"
updated: "20210819"
---


# McRobbie -  Be creative: making a living in the new culture industries 

> Alongside all of this anti-state invective from the Freiburg School, accompanied as it was by a view that welfare was a cornerstone of the proletarian movement and thus antipathetic to middle-class interests, we also see the emphasis that runs through this thinking on supporting ‘fresh, non-proletarian’ industries (Roepke makes this point strongly, looking to craft as an example; Foucault 2008, p. 157) and with this the absolute centrality of the figure of the entrepreneur. The important thing is that this kind of person is also understood as a life force, someone who according to Rustow (another of the Ordos) embodies a kind of politics of life, a Vitalpolitik, and who is able to multiply his wide range of activities, thereby spreading the risk. It is this kind of person who can use the market and its competitive mechanisms to entrepreneurialize wherever he sees fit, at every available opportunity. Rustow's Vitalpolitik embeds the new entrepreneur deep down into the rich fabric of everyday life, where she or he is provided with emotional ties and spiritual reward in what might otherwise be a sphere of ‘cold, calculating, rational and mechanical’ activity (Foucault 2008, p. 242). The importance of finding enjoyment and reward in work itself is an important counter to the Marxist idea of ‘alienation’; this new kind of workforce will have no reason to find common cause in the monotony or boredom of labour. Pleasure at work is thus an instrument to help ward off the dangers of worker dissatisfaction and thus ‘combination’. By turning more people into small entrepreneurs, capitalism will be renewed and will be able to deflect all threats from socialist movements. And the ‘birth of a new art of government’ will ensure that through constant vigilance, activity and innovation, the right kinds of economic institutions develop (Foucault 2008, pp. 168, 176). Of course this is an ideal, the reality of which may never have been fully reached; nevertheless it has shaped and continues to shape the culture of everyday life in the US, and in western Europe and especially in the UK where it was heralded by governments from Mrs Thatcher onwards as the key to economic success, the alternative to the old post-war social order dominated by the trade unions and public sector institutions, and issuing forth a programme of actions through which a competitive ethos would wash away the residues of ‘the social’.[@mcrobbie-2016-be n.pag.]

> This entrepreneurial spirit is to become so enmeshed in everyday life that the lines between work and life will be dissolved. This is also the ethos of the small businessman or woman who has an entrepreneurial vision of his own life as it is lived, such that this brings new kinds of rewards, not just financial but emotional, on the grounds that there is widespread approval for such persons. The Vitalpolitik emphasizes the commendable risk-taking personality. If we translate this into the contemporary scene of creative economy we can make more sense of what I have called the ethos of ‘passionate work’, which envelops the identity of the cultural entrepreneur and which decorates his or her publicity material as a kind of statement of intent and declaration of suitability for participation in this sector. When we talk then about subject formation we might say that passion becomes a normative requirement, indeed a cliché, in the outlook and presentation of self in this milieu. Norms such as those governing conduct also have profound implications for personhood, narrowing and prescribing the range of individual styles and modes of conduct that are deemed appropriate and likewise punishing those that depart from such straitjackets of the self. The cheerful, upbeat, passionate, entrepreneurial person who is constantly vigilant in regard to opportunities for projects or contracts must display a persona that mobilizes the need to be at all times one's own press and publicity agent. This accounts for a flattening and homogenization of personhood or, as Sennett would put it, a ‘corrosion of character’ (Sennett 1995).[@mcrobbie-2016-be n.pag.]


> The meaning of professionalism for art students is also now understood in terms of entrepreneurialism. This is seen as an accompaniment to imagination or inspiration. It also marks out the economization of imagination, the marketization of creativity. It does not just supplement the already existing capacities of the subject but drives them, steering the artistic subject in particular directions that are conducive to commercial success. Human capital functions then as a technology of the self; it is a key aspect of the dispositif of creativity. And the artistic career designed according to this kind of template becomes a symbol for the high-risk career pathways that are also normalized across the new cultural industries. Since the artist has also historically embodied a kind of free spirit, an unbridled freedom of movement as he or she roams about in search of the ideas that will inform the next piece of work, then here too is the secret to the prominent place now occupied by the artist in the policy worlds of the creative economy. As Foucault says, the ‘motto’ is to ‘live dangerously’ (Foucault 2008, p. 168).[@mcrobbie-2016-be n.pag.]


> While the history, structure and modes of exploitation specific to neoliberalism have been well documented…the type of subject that is both constituted by this regime and tasked with upholding it has been rather less studied. (Feher 2005, p. 25)[@mcrobbie-2016-be n.pag.]

> It doesn't seem like work to me. It's like an artist. An artist just does whatever he wants to, and can just sit around all day and paint when you feel like it. (Fashion student interview, 29 May 2003, quoted in Bill 2012, p. 54)[@mcrobbie-2016-be n.pag.]


> When and where are the various toolkits, pedagogies and instruments actually implemented? In what kind of educational packages are they delivered? How might it be possible to judge the impact of this business studies approach? Without the resources for such an undertaking, I must here rely, instead, on some more general observations. For instance the media, especially the UK press and television, have been privileged conduits for the dissemination of and popularization of many of those modes and styles that have transformed how we think about higher education and post-formal education and training.[@mcrobbie-2016-be n.pag.]
 
 
