---
aliases: []
tags: []
author: "Annie Murphy Paul"
year: "2021"
title: "The Extended Mind: The Power of Thinking Outside the Brain"
type: "literature"
current-status: "in-process"
updated: "2020927"
---

#  Murphy Paul - The Extended Mind 

## Prologue 
> I encountered his words as I was working on a chapter about how bodily movement affects the way we think. The quote from Nietzsche appears in a book titled A Philosophy of Walking, by the contemporary French philosopher Frédéric Gros; Gros has his own thoughts to add. Don’t think of a book as issuing only from an author’s head, he advises. “Think of the scribe’s body: his hands, his feet, his shoulders and legs. Think of the book as an expression of physiology. In all too many books the reader can sense the seated body, doubled up, stooped, shriveled in on itself.”
> My seated body shifted guiltily in its chair, which it had occupied all morning.
> Far more conducive to the act of creation, Gros continues, is “the walking body”—which, he says, is “unfolded and tensed like a bow: opened to wide spaces like a flower to the sun.” Nietzsche, he reminds us, wrote that we should “sit as little as possible; do not believe any idea that was not born in the open air and of free movement.”
> The philosophers were ganging up on me; I closed my laptop and went for a walk.




> This book argues otherwise: it holds that the mind is something more like the nest-building bird I spotted on my walk, plucking a bit of string here, a twig there, constructing a whole out of available parts. For humans these parts include, most notably, the feelings and movements of our bodies; the physical spaces in which we learn and work; and the other minds with which we interact—our classmates, colleagues, teachers, supervisors, friends. 

> First, there is the study of embodied cognition, which explores the role of the body in our thinking: for example, how making hand gestures increases the fluency of our speech and deepens our understanding of abstract concepts. Second, there is the study of situated cognition, which examines the influence of place on our thinking: for instance, how environmental cues that convey a sense of belonging, or a sense of personal control, enhance our performance in that space. And third, there is the study of distributed cognition, which probes the effects of thinking with others—such as how people working in groups can coordinate their individual areas of expertise (a process called “transactive memory”), and how groups can work together to produce results that exceed their members’ individual contributions (a phenomenon known as “collective intelligence”).

> Once again a philosopher came to my rescue: this time it was Andy Clark, professor of cognitive philosophy at the University of Sussex in England. In 1995 Clark had co-written a paper titled “The Extended Mind,” which opened with a deceptively simple question: “Where does the mind stop and the rest of the world begin?” Clark and his coauthor, philosopher David Chalmers, noted that we have traditionally assumed that the mind is contained within the head—but, they argued, “there is nothing sacred about skull and skin.” Elements of the world outside may effectively act as mental “extensions,” allowing us to think in ways our brains could not manage on their own.

> [Clark] observed that our physical movements and gestures play “an important role in an extended neural-bodily cognitive economy”; he noted that humans are inclined to create “designer environments”—carefully appointed spaces “that alter and simplify the computational tasks which our brains must perform in order to solve complex problems.” 

##  Introduction: Thinking Outside the Brain

> The brain does do a few things exquisitely well—things like sensing and moving the body, navigating through space, and connecting with other humans. These activities it can manage fluently, almost effortlessly. But accurately recalling complex information? Engaging in rigorous logical reasoning? Grasping abstract or counterintuitive ideas? Not so much.

> This oversight is the regrettable result of what has been called our “neurocentric bias”—that is, our idealization and even fetishization of the brain—and our corresponding blind spot for all the ways cognition extends beyond the skull. (As the comedian Emo Philips has remarked: “I used to think that the brain was the most wonderful organ in my body. Then I realized who was telling me this.”) 

> Even more promising, they offer practical guidelines for enhancing our thinking through the use of these outside-the-brain resources. 

- curious that the point would be this enhancement 

> Two years earlier, Clark and his colleague David Chalmers had coauthored an article that named and described just this phenomenon. Their paper, titled “The Extended Mind,” began by posing a question that would seem to have an obvious answer. “Where does the mind stop and the rest of the world begin?” it asked. Clark and Chalmers went on to offer an unconventional response. The mind does not stop at the standard “demarcations of skin and skull,” they argued. Rather, it is more accurately viewed as “an extended system, a coupling of biological organism and external resources.” A recognition of this reality, they acknowledged, “will have significant consequences”—in terms of “philosophical views of the mind,” but also “in moral and social domains.” The authors were aware that the vision they were setting out would require a thorough reimagining of what people are like and how they function, a reimagining they saw as necessary and right. Once “the hegemony of skin and skull is usurped,” they concluded, “we may be able to see ourselves more truly as creatures of the world.”

> We extend beyond our limits, not by revving our brains like a machine or bulking them up like a muscle—but by strewing our world with rich materials, and by weaving them into our thoughts.

## Part 1: Thinking with our bodies

### 1. Thinking with Sensations

> But—if our knowledge of these patterns is not conscious, how then can we make use of it? The answer is that, when a potentially relevant pattern is detected, it’s our interoceptive faculty that tips us off: with a shiver or a sigh, a quickening of the breath or a tensing of the muscles. The body is rung like a bell to alert us to this useful and otherwise inaccessible information. Though we typically think of the brain as telling the body what to do, just as much does the body guide the brain with an array of subtle nudges and prods. (One psychologist has called this guide our “somatic rudder.”)

> The practice of affect labeling, like the body scan, is a kind of mental training intended to get us into the habit of noting and naming the sensations that arise in our bodies. Psychologists recommend keeping two things in mind as we try it out. The first is to be as prolific as possible: the UCLA scientists reported that study participants who came up with a larger number of terms for what they were feeling subsequently experienced a greater reduction in their physiological arousal. The second is to be as granular as possible: that is, to choose words that are precise and specific when describing what we feel. Accurately distinguishing among interoceptive sensations is associated with making sounder decisions, acting less impulsively, and planning ahead more successfully—perhaps because it gives us a clearer sense of what we need and what we want.


> Psychologists who study the construction of emotion call this practice “cognitive reappraisal.” It involves sensing and labeling an interoceptive sensation, as we’ve learned to do here, and then “reappraising” it—reinterpreting it in an adaptive way. We can, for example, reappraise “nervousness” as “excitement.” Consider the interoceptive sensations that accompany these two emotions: a racing heart, sweaty palms, a fluttering stomach. The feelings are almost identical; it’s the meaning we assign to them that makes them, variously, an ordeal to be dreaded or a thrill to be enjoyed. The one thing we are not, in such moments, is cool or calm—and yet most of us are convinced that when we are in anxiety’s grip, what we ought to do is try to calm down.

> That such trickery is even possible only serves to underline the robustness of the connection between body and mind, the two-way flow of information that does so much to shape our daily decisions, our everyday efforts, our most intimate relationships. This link may also form the foundation of something even more fundamental: our sense of self. Among all their other functions, the steady flow of internal sensations we experience provides us with a sense of personal continuity. Thinkers have long mused on how it is that we can regard ourselves as unique and persistently existing entities. “What makes me the same person throughout my life, and a different person from you?” wondered the late philosopher Derek Parfit. Their answers have usually had something to do with the brain—with our thoughts or our memories. As the French philosopher René Descartes declared, “I think, therefore I am.”
> According to neuroanatomist and interoception expert A. D. Craig, it would be more accurate to say, “I feel, therefore I am.” Craig maintains that interoceptive awareness is the basis of the “material me,” the source of our most fundamental knowledge of ourselves. Because our hearts beat, because our lungs expand, because our muscles stretch and our organs rumble—and because all these sensations, unique to us, have carried on without interruption since the day of our birth—we know what it is to be one continuous self, to be ourselves and no other. Interoception, says Craig, is nothing less than “the feeling of being alive.”

### 2. Thinking with movement 

> When we’re engaged in physical activity, our visual sense is sharpened, especially with regard to stimuli appearing in the periphery of our gaze. This shift, which is also found in non-human animals, makes evolutionary sense: the visual system becomes more sensitive when we are actively exploring our environment. When our bodies are at rest—that is, sitting still in a chair—this heightened acuity is dialed down.

> Scientists investigating this phenomenon have approached it from two different directions: the intensity of the movement and the type of movement. As we’ll soon see, low-, medium-, and high-intensity physical activity each exerts a distinct effect on our cognition. Later on in the chapter, we’ll explore how certain types of movement—congruent movements, novel movements, self-referential movements, and metaphorical movements—can also extend our thinking beyond what is possible when we remain stationary.

> Raichlen, who has conducted extensive studies of some of the world’s remaining hunter-gatherer tribes, points out that this way of life is both physically and cognitively demanding. Foraging requires vigorous, sustained physical activity; it also makes demands on attention, memory, spatial navigation, motor control, and executive functions like planning and decision making. Hunting, too, poses both a mental and a physical challenge: the hunter has to locate the animal and track its unpredictable movements even while mustering the energy to outrun it. Such are the conditions under which the unique human brain evolved. The dual demands of physical challenge and cognitive complexity shaped our special status as Homo sapiens; to this day, bodily activity and mental acuity are still intimately intertwined.

> We associate stillness with steadiness, seriousness, and industriousness; we believe there’s something virtuous about controlling the impulse to move. At times and places where there’s work to be done, physical movement is regarded with disapproval, even suspicion. (Consider the way we associate fidgeting with a certain moral shiftiness.) What this attitude overlooks is that the capacity to regulate our attention and our behavior is a limited resource, and some of it is used up by suppressing the very natural urge to move.

> Isbister, a professor of computational media at the University of California, Santa Cruz, believes that the social disapproval directed at fidgeting is misplaced. Though we imagine that we can manage our mental activity from within our heads, it’s often more effective to employ the movements of our bodies for that purpose—to engage in what she calls “embodied self-regulation.” Isbister would reverse the usual chain of command in which the brain tells the body what to do. “Changing what the body does,” she notes, “can change our feelings, perceptions, and thoughts.”

> After fine-tuning his approach over several years, Chinnici published an account of his method in the journal The American Biology Teacher. He begins by distributing baseball caps and t-shirts, each of which has been marked with a letter representing a gene: uppercase letters for dominant genes, lowercase letters denoting recessive genes. Once they have donned these items of clothing, students are guided through a kind of carefully choreographed waltz. In prophase, some of the “human chromosomes” pair up by linking arms. In metaphase, those chromosomes who have remained unpaired move to an area designated as the “spindle.” On to anaphase, during which the paired-up students split apart and move to opposite poles of the spindle. Finally, they act out telophase, in which the spindle dissolves and the chromosomes unwind. Amid some awkward laughter and some momentarily furrowed brows, students find their way through this odd dance—seeing, and feeling, for themselves how the many moving parts interact.

^781857

Useful for [[interpretive dance]]?

> To take one example: by moving our bodies, we activate a deeply ingrained and mostly unconscious metaphor connecting dynamic motion with dynamic thinking. Call to mind the words we use when we can’t seem to muster an original idea—we’re “stuck,” “in a rut”—and those we reach for when we feel visited by the muse. Then we’re “on a roll,” our thoughts are “flowing.” Research has demonstrated that people can be placed in a creative state of mind by physically acting out creativity-related figures of speech—like “thinking outside the box.” Psychologist Evan Polman of the University of Wisconsin–Madison designed an experiment in which participants were asked to complete a creative thinking task. Some students carried out the assignment while sitting inside a five-foot-square cardboard box; others completed the task while sitting next to the box. The participants who did their thinking literally “outside the box” came up with a list of creative solutions that was, on average, 20 percent longer than the list produced by those who brainstormed inside the box.

^fefc98

- Instrumentalisation of dance. Producing value. [[interpretive dance]]
 
 ## Thinking with gesture 

> Lacking a fully developed understanding, or even the relevant technical vocabulary, his students lean heavily on gesture to convey their budding knowledge—and this is just what their professor wants to see. “It is from the attempt of expressing themselves that understanding evolves, rather than the other way around,” he maintains.

> Designed gestures offer another benefit as well: they are especially effective at reinforcing our memory. That’s because gesturing while speaking involves sinking multiple mental “hooks” into the material to be remembered—hooks that enable us to reel in that piece of information when it is needed later on. There is the auditory hook: we hear ourselves saying the words aloud. There is the visual hook: we see ourselves making the relevant gesture. And there is the “proprioceptive” hook; this comes from feeling our hands make the gesture. (Proprioception is the sense that allows us to know where our body parts are positioned in space.) Surprisingly, this proprioceptive cue may be the most powerful of the three: research shows that making gestures enhances our ability to think even when our gesturing hands are hidden from our view.

#  Part Two

###  Chapter 4; Thinking with Natural Spaces

>  All these salutary effects on our mental function can be understood as a process of restoration: time spent outdoors gives us back what the built environment so relentlessly drains away. More than a century ago, psychologist William James drew a distinction that bears closely on our understanding of nature’s restorative powers. There are two kinds of attention, wrote James in his 1890 book The Principles of Psychology: “voluntary” and “passive.” Voluntary attention takes effort; we must continually direct and redirect our focus as we encounter an onslaught of stimuli or concentrate hard on a task. Navigating an urban environment—with its hard surfaces, sudden movements, and loud, sharp noises—requires voluntary attention. Passive attention, by contrast, is effortless: diffuse and unfocused, it floats from object to object, topic to topic. This is the kind of attention evoked by nature, with its murmuring sounds and fluid motions; psychologists working in the tradition of James call this state of mind “soft fascination.”

> We can do so by simply going outside. We don’t need to wait for perfect weather, or to find our way to some unspoiled wilderness; any form of nature, under any conditions, will do. There is, however, an optimal attitudinal stance we can adopt: what researchers call “open monitoring,” or a curious, accepting, nonjudgmental response to all we encounter. Dor Abrahamson, a professor of education at the University of California, Berkeley, suggests borrowing the technique of “soft gazing” from the traditional Chinese practice of meditative movement known as tai chi. When soft gazing was introduced at a workshop he organized on bringing mindfulness to education, Abrahamson reports that one participant immediately noticed how it departed from his usual mode. “There is hard looking-at,” the participant pointed out, “and there is the soft receiving of images.” The orientation we adopt when in nature is ideally one of such informal mindfulness. (For those intending to establish a more formal practice of meditation, research shows that doing so in nature makes the habit easier to implement and maintain.)

> One exception might be the use of an app like ReTUNE—an example of extended technology developed by University of Chicago psychologist Marc Berman and doctoral student Kathryn Schertz. (The name is an acronym that stands for Restoring Through Urban Nature Experience.) ReTUNE is like a conventional GPS system, but programmed with a different set of values: instead of providing its users with the speediest route, it offers them the path with the greatest number of trees, the largest proportion of flowers, the highest frequency of birdsong.

> Nature is complex, it’s true, but its complexity is of a kind that our brains are readily able to process. When we’re surrounded by nature, we experience a high degree of “perceptual fluency,” notes Yannick Joye, a senior researcher at the ISM University of Management and Economics in Lithuania. Basking in such ease gives our brains a rest, Joye explains, and also makes us feel good; we react with positive emotion when information from our environment can be absorbed with little effort.

> “Natural environments are characterized by a deep degree of perceptual predictability and redundancy, whereas urban scenes tend to consist of perceptually divergent objects,” Joye notes. “These divergences compete for our visual attention and make urban scenes substantially less easy to grasp and process.”

> Likewise, people whose brain activity is being recorded with EEG equipment enter a state that researchers call “wakefully relaxed”—simultaneously alert and at ease—when viewing fractals like those found in nature.

> When we see or experience an urban setting, we are primed to feel competitive, to believe we need to grab what’s available. Nature, by contrast, inspires a feeling of abundance, a reassuring sense of permanence.

> Strayer, who also studies the distracting effects of digital media, believes that an enforced separation from phones and computers played no small part in the hikers’ increased ability to think creatively. Our electronics are deliberately engineered to grab our attention and not let it go; our devices work against the diffuse mental processes that generate creativity, and escaping into nature is one of the only ways we can leave them behind.

Look him up re mobiles: David Strayer calls it the “three day effect.” Strayer, a psychologist at the University of Utah

> There’s another way in which the digital respite we get in nature could enhance our creativity. The time we spend scrutinizing our small screens leads us to think small, even as it enlarges and aggrandizes our sense of self. Nature’s vastness—the unfathomable scale of the ocean, of the mountains, of the night sky—has the opposite effect. It makes us feel tiny, even as it opens wide our sense of the possible. It does all this through an emotion that we confront most commonly in nature: awe. Dacher Keltner, a professor of psychology at the University of California, Berkeley, has led much of the recent research on awe; he calls it an emotion “in the upper reaches of pleasure and on the boundary of fear.”


> The experience of awe, Keltner and other researchers have found, prompts a predictable series of psychological changes. We become less reliant on preconceived notions and stereotypes. We become more curious and open-minded. And we become more willing to revise and update our mental “schemas”: the templates we use to understand ourselves and the world. The experience of awe has been called “a reset button” for the human brain. But we can’t generate a feeling of awe, and its associated processes, all on our own; we have to venture out into the world, and find something bigger than ourselves, in order to experience this kind of internal change.

> Scientists who study awe have also found that it alters the way we regard other people. Brain scans of people who are experiencing awe find that the region of the brain that contributes to our sense of occupying and orienting ourselves in space becomes less active. This diminished activity would seem to underlie the feeling we have when awestruck that the boundaries between ourselves and others have become more permeable, that we are part of a larger, connected whole. In behavioral terms, people act more prosocially and more altruistically following an experience of awe. They share and cooperate more in games after having watched a video of sublime scenes of nature; after having gazed up at a grove of old-growth trees, an experiment found, people were more likely to bend down and help pick up pens that a stranger (actually a confederate of the researcher) had dropped on the ground.

> THE OCCASIONS FOR awe available to our forebears are the same ones that move us now: mountains, oceans, trees, sky. But there is one all-encompassing encounter with the natural world that, to date, has been experienced by only a handful of our contemporaries: the view of Earth from outer space, as glimpsed by astronauts. So emotionally overwhelming is this sight—and so consistent are the psychological consequences for the few who have seen it—that scientists have given it a name: “the overview effect.” “If somebody’d said before the flight, ‘Are you going to get carried away looking at the earth from the moon?’ I would have said, ‘No, no way,’ ” recalled Alan Shepard, an American astronaut who walked on the moon in 1971. “But yet when I first looked back at the earth, standing on the moon, I cried.”
> This emotional reaction to the sight of Earth—to its beauty, to its fragility—is one persistent motif noted by David Yaden, a research fellow at Johns Hopkins University who has studied astronauts’ accounts of their flights. A second recurring theme is the dissolution of the boundaries and barriers that divide those of us here on the ground. From up in outer space, recounted astronaut Rusty Schweickart, “you identify with Houston and then you identify with Los Angeles and Phoenix and New Orleans . . . and that whole process of what it is you identify with begins to shift when you go around the Earth . . . You look down and see the surface of that globe you’ve lived on all this time, and you know all those people down there and they are like you, they are you . . . You recognize that you’re a piece of this total life.” Astronaut Edgar Mitchell recalled an “explosion of awareness” upon seeing Earth from space, an experience that gave him an “overwhelming sense of oneness and connectedness.”

> When we’re outdoors, “we feel ‘at home’ because we remain, in part, the children of our ancestral past,” the architect Harry Francis Mallgrave has written. That past lives on in the way we think when we open the door and go outside.

### Chapter 5 Thinking with Built Spaces

> It’s certainly the case that the nature of today’s work demands frequent consultation and cooperation with others. What we may not realize is that good work also requires periods of abstention from such exchanges—a phenomenon that organizational psychologists call “intermittent collaboration.” Research on intermittent collaboration is based on the understanding that complex problem solving proceeds in two stages, the first of which entails gathering the facts we need to clarify the nature of the problem and begin constructing a solution. In this stage, communication and collaboration are essential. But there is a second phase, equally vital: the process of generating and developing solutions, and figuring out which of these solutions is best. During this phase, studies find, excessive collaboration is actually detrimental.

> Cheryan called the phenomenon documented in her study “ambient belonging,” defined as individuals’ sense of fit with a physical environment, “along with a sense of fit with the people who are imagined to occupy that environment.” Ambient belonging, she proposed, “can be ascertained rapidly, even from a cursory glance at a few objects.” In the research she has since produced, Cheryan has explored how ambient belonging can be enlarged and expanded—how a wider array of individuals can be induced to feel that crucial sense of “fit” in the environments in which they find themselves. The key, she says, is not to eliminate stereotypes but to diversify them—to convey the message that people from many different backgrounds can thrive in a given setting. 

### Chapter 6 Thinking with the Space of Ideas

> The method of loci is a venerable technique, invented by the ancient Greeks and used by educators and orators over many centuries. It works by associating each item to be remembered with a particular spot found in a familiar place, such as one’s childhood home or current neighborhood. 

> Research has found that all of us seem to use the brain’s built-in navigational system to construct mental maps, not just of physical places but of the more abstract landscape of concepts and data—the space of ideas. This repurposing of our sense of physical place to navigate through purely mental structures is reflected in the language we use every day: we say the future lies “up ahead,” while the past is “behind” us; we endeavor to stay “on top of things” and not to get “out of our depth”; we “reach” for a lofty goal or “stoop” low to commit a disreputable act. These are not merely figures of speech but revealing evidence of how we habitually understand and interact with the world around us. Notes Barbara Tversky, a professor of psychology and education at Teachers College in New York: “We are far better and more experienced at spatial thinking than at abstract thinking. Abstract thought can be difficult in and of itself, but fortunately it can often be mapped onto spatial thought in one way or another. That way, spatial thinking can substitute for and scaffold abstract thought.”

> For students struggling to recall the provisions set forth in the Bill of Rights, for example, Wilson encourages them to imagine stepping up to the Chow Hall soup tureens: the soup course, which comes first in a meal, thus becomes associated with the First Amendment. Then on to the station where bread is sliced; here Wilson recommends that students picture a pile of the severed limbs of grizzly bears, a scenario sure to prompt a memory of the Second Amendment and its assurance of the right to “bear arms.”

> That image is a bit grisly, but Wilson and his students have found that imagery that is garish or outlandish more readily triggers recall. Obeying that principle, Wilson’s students learn to associate the landmark court case of McDonald v. City of Chicago with an image of the fast food clown Ronald McDonald, wearing a Chicago Bulls jersey, filling his plate at the salad bar. And so on through the remaining eight amendments in the Bill of Rights, each one paired with an imagined sampling of the Chow Hall’s culinary offerings. Wilson’s students enjoy the exercise, and they say it helps them enormously in remembering material for the course. Many students have told him that they’ve started using the method of loci to study for their other classes as well.

> The human brain is not well equipped to remember a mass of abstract information. But it is perfectly tuned to recalling details associated with places it knows—and by drawing on this natural mastery of physical space, we can (as Martin Dresler showed) more than double our effective memory capacity. Extending our minds via physical space can do more than improve our recall, however. Our powers of spatial cognition can help us to think and reason effectively, to achieve insight and solve problems, and to come up with creative ideas. Such powers are especially generative when permitted to operate not on imagined space, as in the method of loci, but on the real thing: tangible, three-dimensional space, of the kind our minds and bodies are so accustomed to navigating.

> “When thought overwhelms the mind, the mind uses the world,” psychologist Barbara Tversky has observed. Once we recognize this possibility, we can deliberately shape the material worlds in which we learn and work to facilitate mental extension—to enhance “the cognitive congeniality of a space,” in the words of David Kirsh, a professor at the University of California, San Diego.



> Seeking to give his students a sense of this process, Greene assigned a field notebook exercise in the upper-level ecology class he teaches to UM undergraduates. He asked them to “pick one thing” and observe it carefully over the entire semester; the object of study could be a single tree, a bird feeder, a beaver dam, the student’s own garden. This was not, he stressed to his class, a rote exercise in recording but a highly generative activity, the starting point of scientific discovery. “One of the main things I wanted to get across is that one of the hardest parts of science is coming up with new questions,” says Greene. “Where do fresh new ideas come from? Careful observations of nature are a great place to start.” In addition to making observations of their chosen site over time, students were required to come up with at least ten research questions inspired by what they saw.
 
> From these observations of expert draftsmen, some promising prescriptions can be drawn. When setting out to generate new ideas, we should begin with only the most general plan or goal; early on in the process, vagueness and ambiguity are more generative than explicitness or definition. Think of the task not in linear terms—tracing a direct line from point A to point B—but rather as a cycle: think, draw, look, rethink, redraw. Likewise, don’t envision the mind telling the pencil what to do; instead, allow a conversation to develop between eye and hand, the action of one informing the other. Finally, we ought to postpone judgment as long as possible, such that this give-and-take between perception and action can proceed without becoming inhibited by preconceived notions or by critical self-doubt. ^afd414

> David Kirsh has made close observations of the way architects use physical mock-ups of the buildings they are designing; when they interact with the models they have constructed, he maintains, “they are literally thinking with these objects.” Interactions carried out in three dimensions, he says, “enable forms of thought that would be hard if not impossible to reach otherwise.” Kirsh calls this the “cognitive extra” that comes from moving concrete objects through physical space—a mental dividend that made the difference for one scientist struggling with a seemingly insoluble problem.

Richard Feynman, who was as well known for authoring popular books such as Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman!

> Feynman wasn’t (just) being crotchety. He was defending a view of the act of creation that would be codified four decades later in Andy Clark’s theory of the extended mind. Writing about this very episode, Clark argues that, indeed, “Feynman was actually thinking on the paper. The loop through pen and paper is part of the physical machinery responsible for the shape of the flow of thoughts and ideas that we take, nonetheless, to be distinctively those of Richard Feynman.” We often ignore or dismiss these loops, preferring to focus on what goes on in the brain—but this incomplete perspective leads us to misunderstand our own minds. Writes Clark, “It is because we are so prone to think that the mental action is all, or nearly all, on the inside, that we have developed sciences and images of the mind that are, in a fundamental sense, inadequate.” We will “begin to see ourselves aright,” he suggests, only when we recognize the role of material things in our thinking—when we correct the errors and omissions of the brainbound perspective, and “put brain, body, and world together again.”

### Part 3: THINKING WITH OUR RELATIONSHIPS

## Chapter 7 Thinking with Experts

> These strategies—breaking down agglomerated steps, exaggerating salient features, supplying categories based on function—help pry open the black box of experts’ automatized knowledge and skill. Extended technology may offer an even more direct probe into the mind of the expert. For example: the nature of expertise is now being studied using eye tracking, the automated monitoring of where the expert’s gaze falls, when, and for how long. Research has shown that, across disciplines, experts look in ways different from novices: they take in the big picture more rapidly and completely, while focusing on the most important aspects of the scene; they’re less distracted by visual “noise,” and they shift more easily among visual fields, avoiding getting stuck. Within any occupation—among surgeons, pilots, programmers, architects, even high school teachers—experts’ gaze patterns are highly similar, while beginners’ are widely divergent and idiosyncratic.

###  Chapter 8: Thinking with Peers



> In a study using fNIRS brain-scanning technology, a team of researchers at Yale University found that an area of the social brain was activated when adult participants looked directly into one another’s eyes, but not when they gazed at the eyes of others recorded on video. “Eye contact opens the gate between the perceptual systems of two individuals, and information flows,” says Joy Hirsch, the Yale neuroscientist who led the study. Another factor that seems to “gate,” or initiate, the process of learning is contingent communication: social exchanges in which the utterances of one partner are directly responsive to what the other has said. When contingent communication is absent, learning may simply fail to occur. A particularly striking example: toddlers under the age of two and a half readily learn new words and actions from a responsive adult but pick up almost nothing from prerecorded instruction delivered on a screen—a phenomenon that researchers call the “video deficit.”

> One such process kicks in even before the tutoring session begins: students who learn information in preparation for teaching someone else review the material more intensively and organize it more thoroughly in their own minds than do students who are learning the same information in order to take a test. For social creatures like us, the prospect of engaging in an interpersonal interaction—with all of its potential for feeling admired or embarrassed—is far more motivating than the relatively anonymous activity of supplying written answers on an exam. Likewise, social interactions with other people alter our physiological state in ways that enhance learning, generating a state of energized alertness that sharpens attention and reinforces memory. Students who are studying on their own experience no such boost in physiological arousal, and so easily become bored or distracted; they may turn on music or open up Instagram to give themselves a dose of the human emotion and social stimulation they’re missing.

> More learning happens for the tutor in the course of teaching. When explaining academic content, the tutor is forced to make explicit the details she might herself have glossed over; the gaps in her own knowledge and understanding become visible. When directing the tutee to the most important aspects of the subject, and drawing connections among these features, the tutor is herself led to engage in a deeper level of mental processing. When fielding the pupil’s questions, and posing questions of her own, the tutor is obliged to adopt a “metacognitive” stance toward the material, consciously monitoring what her pupil knows and what she herself knows. Researchers have found that while students often possess the mental tools required to understand challenging academic content, they simply don’t apply them when studying on their own. When placed in the role of teacher, however, students are compelled to put those tools to use, with previously unrealized benefits for their own learning.

> So powerful is the teacher role, in fact, that some of its cognitive effects can be evoked even when one’s “students” don’t exist. Vincent Hooger­heide, an assistant professor of education at Utrecht University in the Netherlands, has conducted several studies in which participants are asked to explain academic content on camera, to an imagined audience. After studying the material themselves, participants create a short video lesson (on the calculation of probability, for example, or on syllogistic reasoning, among other subjects). No tutee is in attendance, and there is no tutor-tutee interaction—and yet, Hoogerheide has found, the act of teaching on video enhances the teacher’s own learning, improves her test performance, and enhances her ability to “transfer” the learned information to new situations. Writing out an explanation of the same material for an imagined tutee does not generate the same gains. Hoogerheide theorizes that teaching on camera generates persuasive feelings of “social presence”—the sense that there is someone watching and listening. Explaining oneself while being recorded, he notes, measurably increases the explainers’ physiological arousal—a state that is associated with enhanced memory, attention, and alertness.

> Far from being frivolous or unserious, social interaction is a vital complement to intellectual activity, activating aptitudes and capabilities that might otherwise remain unused. But because the brainbound approach to cognition regards information as information, no matter how it is encountered, the social element of thinking is often sacrificed in the name of efficiency and convenience. The spread of technology into education and the workplace has reinforced this tendency, as students are asked to learn mathematical operations from Khan Academy videos and employees are expected to train themselves using online resources.

> In his 2011 book Thinking, Fast and Slow, Kahneman observed, “Contrary to the rules of philosophers of science, who advise testing hypotheses by trying to refute them, people (and scientists, quite often) seek data that are likely to be compatible with the beliefs they currently hold.” The human mind, he lamented, is “a machine for jumping to conclusions.”

> Mercier’s and Sperber’s premise, which they advanced in their 2017 book The Enigma of Reason, makes coherent sense of the very aspects of human thought that have seemed so confounding: the fact that people are capable of stringently evaluating the validity of arguments, along with the fact that they so often fail to do so when the arguments are their own. 

> The argumentative theory also makes specific predictions about the conditions in which reason will function best, such as: the weaknesses of our reasoning faculty will be most evident when we use it outside the context in which it evolved. That context is raucously, noisily social. When we reason alone, inside our own heads, we will be dangerously vulnerable to confirmation bias—constructing the strongest case for our own point of view, and fooling ourselves in the process. Of course, in our brainbound culture, thinking alone is how thinking is usually done, with predictably disappointing results. Mercier and Sperber urge a different approach: arguing together, with the aim of arriving jointly at something close to the truth.

> Stanford University business school professor Robert Sutton conducted the interview with Bird, whom he calls “a vigorous practitioner of creative abrasion.” Bird is on the right track with his approach, says Sutton: “A pile of studies show that when people fight over ideas, and do so with mutual respect, they are more productive and creative.” Indeed, research has consistently found that argument—when conducted in the right way—produces deeper learning, sounder decisions, and more innovative solutions (not to mention better movies).

> The drama inherent in conflict is what keeps us reading or watching. Yet we expect students and employees to attend to information that’s been drained of conflict, blandly presented as the established account or consensus view. In fact, almost every topic can be cast in terms that highlight opposing perspectives—and should be, according to David Johnson, a psychologist at the University of Minnesota. It is “a general rule of teaching,” he has written, “that if an instructor does not create an intellectual conflict within the first few minutes of class, students won’t engage with the lesson.” Johnson has spent decades investigating the uses of what he calls “constructive controversy,” or the open-minded exploration of diverging ideas and beliefs. In his studies, Johnson has found that students who are drawn into an intellectual dispute read more library books, review more classroom materials, and seek out more information from others in the know. Conflict creates uncertainty—who’s wrong? who’s right?—an ambiguity that we feel compelled to resolve by acquiring more facts.

> We are “natural-born arguers,” in Hugo Mercier’s phrase—and we can deliberately deploy that innate capacity to correct our mistakes, clarify our thinking, and reach sounder decisions. The key is to approach the act of arguing with the aim not of winning at all costs but of reaching the truth through a vigorous process of advancing claims and evaluating counter-claims. We use argument to its full advantage when we make the best case for our own position while granting the points lodged against it; when we energetically critique our partner’s position while remaining open to its potential virtues. According to Robert Sutton, the Stanford business school professor, we should endeavor to offer “strong opinions, weakly held”; put another way, he says, “People should fight as if they are right, and listen as if they are wrong.”
> Listening—and telling—is at the heart of one more way we can use social interaction to enhance our thinking: through the exchange of stories.

> Cognitive scientists refer to stories as “psychologically privileged,” meaning they are granted special treatment by our brains. Compared to other informational formats, we attend to stories more closely. We understand them more readily. And we remember them more accurately. Research has found that we recall as much as 50 percent more information from stories than from expository passages.

### Chapter 9 Thinking with Groups

> A psychologist on the lookout for “socially distributed cognition” could hardly have chanced upon a better example. Too often, however, we’re not alert to such instances of collective thought. Our culture and our institutions tend to fixate on the individual—on his uniqueness, his distinctiveness, his independence from others. In business and education, in public and private life, we emphasize individual competition over joint cooperation. We resist what we consider conformity (at least in its overt, organized form), and we look with suspicion on what we call “groupthink.” ^6fe10a

> “Words are inadequate to describe the emotion aroused by the prolonged movement in unison that drilling involved,” he wrote. “A sense of pervasive well-being is what I recall; more specifically, a strange sense of personal enlargement; a sort of swelling out, becoming bigger than life, thanks to participation in collective ritual.” McNeill continued, “Obviously, something visceral was at work; something, I later concluded, far older than language and critically important in human history, because the emotion it arouses constitutes an indefinitely expansible basis for social cohesion among any and every group that keeps together in time, moving big muscles together and chanting, singing, or shouting rhythmically.”

> By one year of age, a baby will reliably look in the direction of an adult’s gaze, even absent the turning of the adult’s head. Such gaze-following is made easier by the fact that people have visible whites of the eyes. Humans are the only primates so outfitted, an exceptional status that has led scientists to propose the “cooperative eye hypothesis”—the theory that our eyes evolved to support cooperative social interactions. “Our eyes see, but they are also meant to be seen,” notes science writer Ker Than.

> The Energy Project, a training and consulting firm based in New York, holds a companywide “community meeting” every Wednesday. Each of the organization’s employees is asked a series of simple questions, starting with “How are you feeling?” “That’s a very different question than the standard ‘How are you?’ we all ask each other every day,” notes Tony Schwartz, the company’s founder and CEO. “When people stop and reflect, and then say, one at a time, how each of them are really feeling, it opens up a deeper level of dialogue.” At times, he recounts, his colleagues’ answers have been searching or even wrenching, reflecting a personal crisis or family tragedy. But even when responses are more run-of-the-mill, the members of his close-knit staff have shared an emotional experience with one another, one that is fleshed out by the remaining questions in the series: “What’s the most important thing you learned last week?” “What’s your goal for this week?” “What are you feeling most grateful for?”

> All of these approaches to generating groupiness are firmly grounded in our nature as embodied, situated, social beings; their effectiveness depends on people moving, talking, and working together, so closely that their brains and bodies fall into a joint rhythm. This marks a difference from notions such as “crowdsourcing” and the “hive mind,” which have enjoyed a sustained surge of popularity. In theory and in practice, these concepts are highly brainbound: a bunch of disembodied minds bouncing ideas around, usually online. Technology more generally has often served to isolate us from one another, sealing us within our individual digital bubbles. But this need not be the case; promising models of extended technology—that is, extended by the age-old resource of the human group—are now emerging.

> This development is more than an academic fad, says Brian Uzzi, a professor of management at Northwestern University who conducted some of this research: “It suggests that the process of knowledge creation has fundamentally changed.” More broadly, Uzzi notes, “almost everything that human beings do today, in terms of generation of value, is no longer done by individuals. It’s done by teams.” What has not changed is our model of how intelligent thinking happens. We’re still convinced that good ideas and new insights and ingenious solutions come from a single brain; we’re a bunch of pencil-wielding Satyendra Boses in an era of particle accelerators and mega-collaborations. This fundamental mismatch lies at the root of many of our struggles with group work.

> As soon as a leader makes his preferences known, says Sunstein, many who work for him will choose to engage in “self-silencing” rather than rock the boat with a dissenting view. And, he notes, “some people are more likely to silence themselves than others”; these may include women and members of minority groups, as well as individuals with less status, less experience, or less education. Yet it’s just this range of voices that must be heard if the group mind is to exert its unique power. One solution, says Sunstein, is for leaders to silence themselves; the manager or administrator who adopts an “inquisitive and self-silencing” stance, he maintains, has the best chance of hearing more than his own views reflected back to him.

> The second way in which group thinking differs from individual thinking is this: when thinking as part of a collective, we need to make our thought processes visible to others on our team. While we do leave “traces” for ourselves when engaging in private thought—underlining, jotting notes in margins, moving papers from the “unread” pile to the “have gone through” pile—these traces must be far more specific and explicit if they are to be used productively by others. Philosopher Andy Clark, observing the progressive delegation of our mental operations to our devices, has noted that “the mind is just less and less in the head” these days. More than that, the mind must be less and less in the head, and more and more emblazoned on the world, if we are to extend our minds with the minds of others.

> Another way to make our thinking visible to others is to collaborate on the creation of what Gary Olson and Judith Olson call “shared artifacts.” The Olsons, both professors of informatics at the University of California, Irvine, have spent more than three decades studying how people think and work together. One major contributor to the success of group cognition, they have discovered, is the effective use of such artifacts, or tangible representations of the task to be completed—which are, ideally, large, complex, persistent, and revisable. Over the course of their long careers, the Olsons have often evaluated the effectiveness of workplace technology such as video-conferencing software and digital collaboration platforms. But the baseline against which they compare these tools—the working arrangement they regard as the best of all worlds—is decidedly analog: a group of people gathered together in a room that is dedicated to their current project, with plenty of space on the walls to tack up those shared artifacts (which may take the form of lists, graphs, charts, or sketches).


> All of us maintain a set of mental markers that help us locate information we don’t currently possess; we may not recall every detail contained in a report, but we know the folder (physical or digital) where the report can be found. Such markers also point us toward the people who possess information we do not; the aim in building a robust transactive memory system is to make these pointers as explicit and as accurate as possible. The process of setting out these markers should begin early in a team’s work together. It’s important to establish from the outset not only who’s responsible for doing what but also who’s responsible for knowing what. Group members should be explicitly informed about their colleagues’ distinctive talents or spheres of specialization, and clear protocols should be established for directing questions and tasks to the appropriate individual. Research shows that groups perform best when each member is clearly in charge of maintaining a particular body of expertise—when each topic has its designated “knowledge champion,” as it were. Studies further suggest that it can be useful to appoint a meta-knowledge champion: an individual who is responsible for keeping track of what others in the group know and making sure that group members’ mental “directory” of who knows what stays up to date.

### Conclusion



> The first set of principles lays out some habits of mind we would do well to adopt, starting with this one: whenever possible, we should offload information, externalize it, move it out of our heads and into the world. 

> Onward to the second principle: whenever possible, we should endeavor to transform information into an artifact, to make data into something real—and then proceed to interact with it, labeling it, mapping it, feeling it, tweaking it, showing it to others. Humans evolved to handle the concrete, not to contemplate the abstract. We extend our intelligence when we give our minds something to grab onto: when we experience a concept from physics as a bicycle wheel spinning in our hands, for example, or when we turn a foreign language vocabulary word into a gesture we can see and sense and demonstrate to others. 

> In a related vein, the third principle: whenever possible, we should seek to productively alter our own state when engaging in mental labor. 

> Effective mental extension, then, requires us to think carefully about inducing in ourselves the state that is best suited for the task at hand. 

> The second set of principles offers a higher-level view of how mental extension works, in accordance with an understanding of what the brain evolved to do. The brain is well adapted to sensing and moving the body, to navigating through physical space, and to interacting with other members of our species. On top of this basic suite of human competencies, civilization has built a vast edifice of abstraction, engaging our brains in acts of symbolic processing and conceptual cognition that don’t come as naturally. These abstractions have, of course, allowed us to expand our powers exponentially—but now, paradoxically, further progress may depend on running this process in reverse. In order to succeed at the increasingly complex thinking modern life demands, we will find ourselves needing to translate abstractions back into the corporeal, spatial, and social forms from which they sprang—forms with which the brain is still most at ease.


> We can begin to understand what this means by taking up the fourth principle: whenever possible, we should take measures to re-embody the information we think about. The pursuit of knowledge has frequently sought to disengage thinking from the body, to elevate ideas to a cerebral sphere separate from our grubby animal anatomy. Research on the extended mind counsels the opposite approach: we should be seeking to draw the body back into the thinking process. 

> The fifth principle emphasizes another human strength: whenever possible, we should take measures to re-spatialize the information we think about. We inherited “a mind on the hoof,” as Andy Clark puts it: a brain that was built to pick a path through a landscape and to find the way back home. Neuroscientific research indicates that our brains process and store information—even, or especially, abstract information—in the form of mental maps. We can work in concert with the brain’s natural spatial orientation by placing the information we encounter into expressly spatial formats: creating memory palaces, for example, or designing concept maps. 



> The sixth principle rounds out the roster of our innate aptitudes: whenever possible, we should take measures to re-socialize the information we think about. We learned earlier in this book that the continual patter we carry on in our heads is in fact a kind of internalized conversation. Likewise, many of the written forms we encounter at school and at work—from exams and evaluations, to profiles and case studies, to essays and proposals—are really social exchanges (questions, stories, arguments) put on paper and addressed to some imagined listener or interlocutor. As we’ve seen, there are significant advantages to turning such interactions at a remove back into actual social encounters. 

> A clear-eyed acknowledgment of our quirks can lead us to create new kinds of mental routines, such as the one encapsulated in the seventh principle: whenever possible, we should manage our thinking by generating cognitive loops.

> We can pass our thoughts through the portal of our bodies: seeking the verdict of our interoception, seeing what our gestures have to show us, acting out our ideas in movement, observing the inspirations that arise during or after vigorous exercise. We can spread out our thoughts in space, treating the contents of the mind as a territory to be mapped and navigated, surveyed and explored. And we can run our thoughts through the brains of the people we know, gathering from the lot of them the insights no single mind could generate. Most felicitous of all, we can loop our thoughts through all three of these realms. What we shouldn’t do is keep our thoughts inside our heads, inert, unchanged by encounters with the world beyond the skull.

> Hence, the eighth principle: whenever possible, we should manage our thinking by creating cognitively congenial situations.

> We’ll elicit improved performance from the brain when we approach it with the aim not of issuing orders but of creating situations that draw out the desired result.

> The final principle of extension doubles back on itself with a self-referential observation. What kind of creatures are we? The kind who extend, eagerly and energetically, when given the chance. Consider: research from neuroscience and cognitive psychology indicates that when we begin using a tool, our “body schema”—our sense of the body’s shape, size, and position—rapidly expands to encompass it, as if the tool we’re grasping in our hand has effectively become an extension of our arm. Something similar occurs in the case of mental extensions. As long as extensions are available—and especially when they are reliably, persistently available—we humans will incorporate them into our thinking. Accordingly, the ninth principle: whenever possible, we should manage our thinking by embedding extensions in our everyday environments.

> Bocanegra’s publication is just a start, but it’s easy to envision a broad expansion of similar efforts. Imagine a test that would evaluate how well an individual is able to use interoception, movement, and gesture to think; how adept she is at soaking up natural settings, designing built environments, and exploiting the space of ideas to enhance her cognition; how skillfully she manages thinking with experts, thinking with peers, and thinking with groups. Such an assessment could represent a new kind of IQ test, measuring a new sort of intelligence. (“New” in the sense of newly admitted into our society’s definition of smart; as we’ve seen throughout this book, humans have been extending their minds since time immemorial.)

> We might begin by applying it to an issue now roiling our society: America’s pervasive inequality, a state of affairs that many are finding ever less justifiable or tolerable. Defenders of the status quo have long argued that social and economic inequality merely reflects a kind of organic inequality, determined by nature, in the talents and abilities with which individuals are born. That argument appears less plausible when viewed through the lens of the extended mind. If our ability to think intelligently is shaped so profoundly by the availability of extra-neural resources, how then can we continue to justify their extraordinarily inequitable distribution?
- somatics and community. Extended. Individualism. Merit. Selfhood. 

> In a famous thought experiment, the contemporary philosopher John Rawls imagined designing the ideal society—but doing so from behind a “veil of ignorance” regarding how the designers themselves would fare in the new world they are creating. While engaged in deciding how society’s affluence and opportunities are to be distributed, Rawls writes, “no one knows his place in society, his class position or social status, nor does anyone know his fortune in the distribution of natural assets and abilities, his intelligence, strength, and the like.”
> Intriguing though it is to contemplate, Rawls’s scenario has always been hard to enter into fully—so closely are we identified with what we take to be our “natural assets and abilities,” our “intelligence” foremost among them. The theory of the extended mind is a tool with which we might begin to pry loose this instinctive identification. Unlike innate intelligence, which we imagine to be an inseparable part of who we “are,” access to mental extensions is more readily understood as a matter of chance or luck. This radically new conceptual theory harbors within it an old and humble moral sentiment: “There but for the grace of God go I.” Acknowledging the reality of the extended mind might well lead us to embrace the extended heart.
- extraordinary conn3ction with Sandel 
 
 
---
 