---
aliases: []
tags: []
type: "literature"

---

#  Rawlence - The Treeline

_previous note:_ [[footfall]]

> But now the planet is hyperventilating. This bright green halo is moving unnaturally fast, crowning the planet with a laurel of needles and leaves, turning the white Arctic green. The migration of the treeline north is no longer a matter of inches per century; instead it is hundreds of feet every year. The trees are on the move. They shouldn’t be. And this sinister fact has enormous consequences for all life on earth.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.7]

> Monoterpenes are volatile organic chemicals produced by pines that the trees use to send signals to each other—to deter herbivores or insects or to coordinate seed release. Monoterpenes are tiny molecules that carry pine scent and bounce sunlight back into space. When pines are metabolising in sunlight there can be as many as one to two thousand particles per cubic centimeter in the air around the tree, reducing the amount of solar radiation hitting the earth. Via the density of the chemical signal and the availability of light, they can detect the presence of other trees.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.24]

> The soil on the island is light brown, almost red, and fibrous to the touch; beneath the crumbling deadwood is a skin almost, a fabric of roots that would challenge any spade. A living tree is 5 percent living cells by volume, a dead one 40 percent, and in a virgin old-growth forest up to 40 percent of the entire biomass might be dead, supporting far more life; the insect load in virgin, unmanaged forests is exponentially higher.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.27]

> Climate breakdown demands that we keep looking at our surroundings afresh. I sense that the struggle to overcome the gap between our idea of the world and the reality will be a feature of the years to come; our imaginations will always be playing catch-up.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.28]

> The tropics and the poles, with their more finely tuned weather patterns and ecosystems, are far more sensitive to global heating than the temperate zones accustomed to variable climates. The downy birch detected the current warming trend much earlier than most scientists. The trees were the canaries but few understood what they were saying.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.59]

> “I do not have feelings about the future. I can’t change things. I am just warning people. It is not my responsibility to solve,” she says without smiling.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.99] -- Nadezhda Tchebakova

> Is this confusion perhaps a wider symptom of the lightning pace of change in our hydrocarbon era? We have barely mourned one way of life before we are being called upon to mourn another.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.117]

> All this makes Ko frustrated. With governments for not investing in data: “It’s appalling how little money is going into this,” and with the media: “The larger public still thinks that climate change will be gradual. They are not alive to the fact that it will be abrupt and what that means in terms of climate disasters and the suffering of their children.” Other scientists have referred to the frozen greenhouse gases of the permafrost as a “monster in hiding.” Ko calls Siberia a “sleeping bear.”[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.122] (Dr Ko van Huissteden)

> “Global warming? Tell my grandchildren, I’ll be dead by then.”[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.130] -- Dzhasta

> Spruce has a strong reliance on mycorrhizal networks and on lichen to supply it with nitrogen and minerals, as most plants do. Over 90 percent of plant species rely on fungi to survive. One end of a fungal fiber embeds itself in or around a tree root. The other end of the fungus, a thread called a hypha, can be fifty times finer than the thinnest roots and hundreds of times longer. This effectively extends the reach of the tree’s root. Globally, these threads of mycorrhizal fungi make up between a third and a half of the living mass of soils.5 Soil is in fact a huge, fragile tangle of tiny connected threads.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.166]

> We are only just beginning to peep below the surface of the forest floor. We still have very little idea about what is going on. All we do know is that the forest, like all life, is a symbiotic system, a dynamic process, not a collection of things or distinct beings. And the more closely we examine it, the more mysterious it becomes. Somewhere down there among the web of hyphae and root tips and the permafrost could be the frontier of the forest. It seems that the key to understanding where and what the treeline is and how it will respond to warming and melting is not to be found among the greening spires of the eager spruce above ground, but in the humid black organic layer below.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.168]

> [Richard K. Nelson] wrote: “The Koyukon people live in a world that watches, in a forest of eyes. A person moving through nature—however wild, remote, even desolate the place may be—is never truly alone. The surroundings are aware, sensate, personified. They feel. They can be offended. And they must, at every moment, be treated with proper respect.”[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.176]

> If who you are is one creature embedded in an ecosystem along with many others, then healing means restoring you to that inherited role, restoring your connection to the land, although the word “land” is insufficient. Pimachiowin is everything, a system of a world. Even “nature” is misleading, since it has come to mean something separate from the human sphere. Pimachiowin is a perfect demonstration of what anthropologist Eduardo Kohn calls an “anthropology beyond the human”—a set of signs, symbols, relationships and meanings bigger than the human realm of consciousness, of which humans are but one part.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.215] ^1445bb

> “We will be fine,” says Eddie. “We will adapt.” The future is not a safe place for the mind to linger.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.227]

> The opportunism of the explorer or the colonist is a different skill set, a different mental geography than the genetic call of home.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.242]

> But the reason there are no trees in Greenland is not because it has been too cold. It is because there has been no seed. Vegetative changes take thousands of years. This is what ecologists call disequilibrium dynamics, an ecosystem or a biome that is in the process of working out its equilibrium. Rather like the changes under way with our current global heating, there is a time lag as species and ecosystems catch up with changed temperatures or currents—in some cases thousands of years. Greenland is still playing catch-up from the last ice age.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.258]

> The harsh mantra of a warming world is “Adapt, move or die.” But some species can move more easily than others. Climate change velocity is the pace at which a species will need to move to track its climatic niche. For conservationists, hard choices will need to be made, like Noah and the ark, although the ark is nowhere near big enough. This is the emerging field of strategic ecology. Planting based not on the current climate but on guesses about the future.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.260]

> Scots pines, for example, usually establish new seedlings less than seven hundred feet from the parent tree with the odd rogue seed traveling farther afield. Pine forests move in packs. Some species, like Cerbera odollam, sometimes called the suicide tree, only have one offspring, in situ, fed by the rotting carcass of the mother. Such specialized species already have an unsustainable climate change velocity, which means they will go extinct without human assistance. A temperate or tropical tree currently facing heat stress might have a climate velocity of several miles a year.3 At that pace, if the tree could walk, you would be able to see it move.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.260]

> “The people with the skills are dying out—the knowledge. No one knows the names anymore…” Her voice tails off, her hands fall to her sides. It is as if survival is one thing, a technical, modern challenge that can be weathered, but the death of her culture is irreparable, unforgivable. This is how the world ends. In a myriad of tiny tragedies. Each extinction of species, language, custom noted not with a howl of protest but with a quiet tear.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.267]

> The treeline has evolved in dialogue with the ice, always maintaining a respectful distance. All across the treeline ecotone it is the ice that dictates which trees can grow where. Orogeny, the combination of tectonic movement, glaciation and erosion, shapes the geology of the earth’s crust. As the glaciers retreat, the resultant shifts in catchment, drainage and minerals change soil composition, nutrient levels and drive the adaptation of plants, trees and associated life forms. The fate of the forest and the ice are entwined in a planetary tango which lasts thousands of years, although the current dance looks to be the last one for quite some time. According to one study, a tiny increase in carbon dioxide in the eighteenth century at the beginning of the industrial era, from 180 to 240 parts per million, stopped the next ice age from being triggered.8 Other studies have suggested that the next ice age might have been due in twenty-three thousand years but now looks as if it will be postponed, if not canceled altogether.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.272]

> Global heating messes with the most essential functions of the earth that we and other species need to survive: the cycles of breathing, the pulses of life. Not just the geological relationship of ice and treeline, up and down in tandem over hundreds of thousands of years, but the annual photosynthetic pulses of seasonal production—the spike of oxygen in spring when the trees put out their leaves, and the daily peaks and troughs between night and day that regulate the primary chloroplastic functions of the plant kingdom. These pulses are literally the heartbeat of the planet—they oxygenate our world—but the peaks and troughs are getting shallower, less well defined, as the oxygen fraction trends downward. When there is more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, trees don’t need to work so hard to get their daily fix of carbon. They conserve energy, they open less of the stomata on their leaves. This means they inhale less, they transpire less, they breathe out less oxygen.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.278]

> Under my feet the reddish-brown rock is scoured with deep grooves, striations from the glacier’s recently completed geological work. I have a strange feeling of time telescoping. I am standing on a geological fault line, the beginning of the Arctic–temperate transition zone, the very edge of a process that finished almost yesterday in planetary terms, when Wales, Scandinavia, Siberia, Alaska and the Canadian Shield were covered in ice, and in the blink of an eye the treeline has chased the melting ice north. It is amazing, actually, how fast nature moves.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.279]

> Our present emergency is forcing us to remember what, until recently, we have always known: that there is a web of communication, meaning and significance beyond us, a world of life forms constantly chattering, shouting and flirting and hunting each other, indifferent to human affairs. And there is solace in such a vision. The way out of the depression and grief and guilt of the carbon cul-de-sac we have driven down is to contemplate the world without us. To know that the earth, that life, will continue its evolutionary journey in all its mystery and wonder. To widen our idea of time, and of ourselves. If we see ourselves as part of a larger whole, then it is the complete picture that is beautiful, worthy of meaning and respect, worth perhaps dying for, safe in the knowledge that life is not the opposite of death but a circle, as the forest teaches us, a continuum.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.280]

> What is plain from my journey along the treeline is that global warming is well advanced and that while humans may still be able to temper the scale and severity of the warming unleashed, they are powerless to stop it. Also, that even during the short time that I have been researching this book (2018–21) the speed of the geological changes being witnessed is accelerating faster than models predicted. The world is in the grip of unprecedented change. The planet you think you live on no longer exists. But this is old news.
> The real question now is what we do with this knowledge. Accepting the reality of our rapidly transforming environment is a fundamental challenge to affluent ways of life and to Western habits of mind founded on notions (and experience) of progress, peace, democracy and economic growth. Conversations in the global north seem trapped between increasingly unrealistic dreams of “net zero” and painless green growth on the one hand and misanthropic stories of apocalypse, violence and human extinction on the other. But the history of the people living along the treeline—who have been living with the reality of a transforming environment for longer than most—offers an alternative. There is a third story, a more positive reading of humans’ relationships with their habitat that holds the key to imagining a different future.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.281]

> The breaching of the ecological ceiling of the planet was only enabled and accelerated by a specific recent economic model: industrial capitalism and its political export, colonialism.2 But capitalism, the exploitation of resources and labor to concentrate wealth in the hands of the few, is not necessarily the best economic model; indeed our collective survival on the planet almost certainly depends on moving beyond it. Surveying the territory from within our capitalist moment we are encouraged to believe there is no alternative and that the crisis is our fault. But accepting the blame is not only profoundly disempowering, it is also misplaced.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.283]

> We did not choose our economic system from a list of all available options. We are all to a greater or lesser extent the victims of historical forces that have built structures of power over centuries based on a very blunt assessment of value. For a tree, only the timber fetches a price at market, not the soil that grew the tree or the insects that pollinated it, the sun that fed it or the rain that watered it. But the community of forest that is home to so many species has no price. Capitalism not only alienates and commodifies nature into products and transforms humans into consumers, it also alienates and commodifies us. Our very gaze has become a product. Our attention is directed away from the biosphere that sustains us, and this alienation makes us to varying degrees blind, deaf and dumb. Looked at in the long history of our coevolution with the forest, the human break with nature is an eye-blink; the story of human life on earth is longer and wider than the history of capitalism and, most important, the ending is not written yet.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.283]

- contrast this paragraph (or imagine it) re Sacasas's work on attentionq

> “What if a mother ladybird came back to her nest only to find the tree had been cut down and her babies were gone!” Parenting in an era of rapid climate change does not allow for the luxury of misanthropy or false hope. We must, to paraphrase the University of California anthropologist Donna Harraway, “stay with the trouble.”[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.284]

(Harraway, Staying with the Trouble, 2016)

> We are on the brink of a new epoch in the life of the planet. At least two degrees Celsius of warming is already “committed”—in the pipeline—although some scientists project even more than that, up to four degrees Celsius of “implicit warming.”4 Before the end of the twenty-first century there will be a wave of extinctions, trees will leap north, steppes will expand, the tundra will disappear along with the Arctic sea ice, the oceans will be reconfigured and cities will flood. The last generation to know a stable climate with seasonal cycles and familiar species—and all the human culture and traditions that rest on that foundation—has already been born.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.286]

>The Koyukon hunter in search of a bear will not name the bear. He will even avoid looking at the bear. The Nganasan storyteller relating a story about a woman in a chum (tent) will not say the head of the household’s name, she will be referred to only as “the one who sits by the door of the chum.” It is a habit present in other indigenous cultures and oral traditions too—not to use people’s names, but to refer to them in terms of who they are in relation to the speaker: “Hey, brother!” “dear sister-in-law,” “teacher,” “older-than-me.” This is a neat acknowledgment that all existence is relational. Each person is not reducible to a single self, but contains many selves, many instances of their self; every creature contains possibilities.
>To name the bear is to objectify the animal, and so is offensive. We do not know how the bear refers to itself, nor do we know what other souls or selves the bear’s body might contain. And so not naming the bear is a mark of humility and of respect. Not naming is also an acknowledgment of indeterminacy—that the bear’s nature is not fixed yet—its relationship to the hunter is still in the process of being determined, a process that will be decided by how the hunter, and the bear, act. The hunter will avoid looking at the bear too, because to see and be seen is a relational activity. When you smell something, tiny particles of the thing you are smelling are dissolving inside your nose: the thing being smelled is becoming you. Indigenous understandings of sensory perception (and those of modern phenomenology as David Abram so eloquently reminds us) take this scientific fact further: all perception is participation. If you see the bear, then it has seen you, and you are both changed by that fact.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.287] ^867f42

Abram book is The Spell of the Sensuous

> Warming is a given, but how species respond to it is a story still being told and one in which humans have a key role to play. Strategic ecology will soon become a core element of national security and community resilience. Assisted migration—helping species move and adapt—will become a key goal of conservation. We are Noah with his ark. We have the power to choose at least some of what survives. The trees we select to survive will determine whole forests and ecosystems—as well as the assemblages of species that rely on them—for millennia. The Anthropocene is only just beginning, and its echoes will dominate the earth even after we are gone.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.288]

> A hopeful future in such a definition is not a prayer for stability, of stasis, but an invitation to participate: to explore, experience, to get lost or find your way. It is an opportunity to realize your true self by doing the right thing. What you have yet to do will always define you more than what you have done in the past. Things cannot be named because they are unfinished. Evolutionary nature is an engine of mystery. Of things we do not and cannot know. In the forest you are part of something magical and huge where every step is simultaneously an act of destruction and of creation, of life. There is consolation in the fact that we are always already living in the ruins of what went before.[@rawlence-2022-treeline p.289]



---

_reference:_ Rawlence, B. (2022) _The Treeline: The Last Forest and the Future of Life on Earth_. First edition. New York: St. Martin’s Press