---
aliases: []
tags: [lithium-dancing]
author: "Alexandra Harlig, Crystal Abidin, Trevor Boffone, Kelly Bowker, Colette Eloi, Pamela Krayenbuhl, Chuyun Oh"
year: "2021"
title: "TikTok and Short-Form Screendance Before and After Covid"
type: "literature"
---


# TikTok and Short-Form Screendance Before and After Covid

> On TikTok, remix cultures are built into the platform norm; my friends Meg Zeng, Xu Chen, as well as Bondy Kaye wrote a paper describing creativity on TikTok as a type of “circumscribed creativity,” where all the features of the platform shape you to create content in specific ways. So while you believe you’ve got flexibility, this platform is really squishing you into a template and teaching you how to perform creativity within a box. -- Crystal Abidin[@harlig-2021-tiktok p.192]

> First, medium specificity is a film and media studies concept inherited from art historians that asks, essentially: what is unique about x medium? What forms or aspects of human expression does x medium allow or disallow? (and in this case x medium could be painting, photography, film, sculpture, etc.) For our purposes, I am interested not in the larger medium of “the computer”—too big—or even the much smaller category of the “smartphone application” but rather the “short-form video app” specifically—so my question becomes: what is unique about these platforms? And to drill down even further: what unique affordances and constraints are given to or placed upon dance by shortform video platforms like Dubsmash and TikTok? For those of you steeped in technology studies literature, you’ll recognize the term affordances from Janet Murray’s work on the “digital medium”—she defines them as properties that allow particular uses. -- Pamela Krayenbuhl [@harlig-2021-tiktok p.198]

> But I’m more interested in TikTok’s constraints, so here are two of its major limiting factors: first, that TikTok videos are limited to 15 seconds or up to 60, but it’s worth noting that the platform’s original 15-second limit tends to be the one that everyone [p.199] cleaves to. And second, the forced vertical or portrait orientation of the app; you can’t flip it sideways as you can with many other applications, so dances can’t move much laterally. These constraints play perhaps the biggest role in shaping dance style and choreography on the platform. Choreographers construct simple sequences of movement in order to stay under that 15-second marker and in the limited space of a portrait-oriented phone screen, amateur dancers can learn and replicate those simple sequences. As Chuyun discussed, the common thread in TikTok choreographies is a focus on the face, as well as hands, arms, hips, and butt. Footwork is rare and so are full-body dances, so the age-old complaint of non-dancers having “two left feet?” Not a problem on TikTok. -- Pamela Krayenbuhl [@harlig-2021-tiktok pp.198-199]

> In the context of Covid-19 and its various lockdowns, we’ve seen millions of new users flock to the app, so these constrained dances with lots of elbow hits—as if they’re hitting the edge of the screen—have been performed by increasingly numerous and diverse people. I want to argue that they collectively constitute a performance of entrapment, mirroring our shared experience of being stuck at home. These dancers are all similarly “stuck” within the frame of their smartphone camera, which is usually propped up or mounted somewhere and notably not moving. Instead of an expansive stage or dance floor, a small rectangle within one’s bedroom, bathroom, kitchen, or porch is the only allotted space for embodied expression, and it gets viewed on loop, much like our day is in front of Zoom. -- Pamela Krayenbuhl [@harlig-2021-tiktok p.199] 

> So, dance does happen there, but there are two core differences: One, a lot of the young people on TikTok use dance as a way to get noticed by the algorithm, and for other people to see them on the “for you” page. Young people perform great dances, but in the captions and the texts laid over, and in their speech, they outrightly tell you, “I’m doing this so the algorithm puts me on your fyp, and now that I’ve got your attention here’s what I want to say.” They’re very aware that dance is the popular format that gets them onto people’s screens. -- Crystal Abidin[@harlig-2021-tiktok p.201]

> I was born in South Korea, and I was able to visit my family there last semester because I was teaching online. Because my research is about K-Pop and also social media, I ended up stuck at home watching a lot of TikTok videos. And I noticed the “for you” suggestions were dramatically different from the videos suggested in the United States. I’m not an Algorithm Studies scholar, but to think about the audience reception of dance, we might need to collaborate with people in other fields, in order to get a better idea of how our understanding of a popular trend is actually manipulated by something beyond our human level of expectation. -- Chuyun Oh[@harlig-2021-tiktok p.201]

> I think it’ll be useful to differentiate finding implications in this fast-changing social media world versus celebrating or glamorizing social media trends. Because what I also notice is that the life span of a viral dance video is really short! TikTok has been here two years, but I cannot even count how many viral dance videos and influencers are out there. -- Chuyun Oh[@harlig-2021-tiktok p.204]

> I think that there’s a really interesting connection between this appropriation question and the platform affordances. As many of you noted, the [p.205] emphasis is above the knee, and on the face—which allows the persona to be a particular focus, but also eliminates some of the parts of the body that we associate most with movement that we would class as Africanist. The knee bend that Kelly referenced, you can’t hardly even see in most TikTok videos! And then videos on other platforms are being influenced by that highly constrained movement. So we have a really specific movement style that’s predicated on the technological components, and that continues to reinforce a change in the performance itself.  -- Alexandra Harlig[@harlig-2021-tiktok pp.204-205]

